[Amit Varma]: If there is one thing in our lives that is unseen, it is the role of the state. There
[Amit Varma]: is nothing quite as oppressive as a modern state, the apparatus of government and all
[Amit Varma]: its agencies. And yet, we have normalized that oppression. Now, the state has a monopoly
[Amit Varma]: on violence, and you could argue that it needs to, because that is how it protects our rights.
[Amit Varma]: That is the one legitimate purpose of the state, right? To protect our rights, to serve
[Amit Varma]: us for we are the masters. In theory. In reality, we are less citizens than subjects. When India
[Amit Varma]: gained independence in 1947, we got rid of the British, but we did not get freedom from
[Amit Varma]: oppression. That same state apparatus that was used to control us in colonial times was
[Amit Varma]: maintained by our new brown-skinned masters. If anything, it became more brutal and more
[Amit Varma]: sophisticated. And yeah, sure, we have elections, but democracy is not just about voting. You
[Amit Varma]: also need mechanisms to safeguard the rights of citizens and to hold the state accountable.
[Amit Varma]: Those mechanisms don't exist. Every election is basically a competition between rival mafias
[Amit Varma]: to see who can rule the people and extract all that they can for whatever time they have
[Amit Varma]: in power. The rewards are great, and they are enabled by the security state.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Josie Joseph, a pioneering investigative
[Amit Varma]: journalist who's written an excellent book named The Silent Coup, A History of India's
[Amit Varma]: Deep State. In this book, he examines and exposes how India's security state has so
[Amit Varma]: many unseen layers to it and how it rules our lives and is damaging our society. We
[Amit Varma]: have seen different aspects of the security state in play. We know the corrupt rent-seeking
[Amit Varma]: police, though most of us thankfully don't have to deal with them beyond bribes or traffic
[Amit Varma]: signals. The rule of law is absent in India, but the police is all-powerful. So is a taxman
[Amit Varma]: often used by the political class as a tool to subjugate those who don't toe the line.
[Amit Varma]: And there are a range of other investigative agencies whose incentives are tailored only
[Amit Varma]: towards pleasing their political masters. And what they get up to with the unbridled
[Amit Varma]: power that they have is staggering. The Silent Coup is a book you must read for that reason.
[Amit Varma]: And I enjoyed my conversation with Josie. Before we get to it, though, let's take a
[Amit Varma]: quick commercial break. Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances
[Amit Varma]: are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog, India Uncut, which was active
[Amit Varma]: between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the
[Amit Varma]: form gave me, and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle
[Amit Varma]: every day and was forced to think about many different things because I wrote about many
[Amit Varma]: different things. Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time
[Amit Varma]: to revive it. Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut
[Amit Varma]: newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever catches
[Amit Varma]: my fancy. I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up,
[Amit Varma]: each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox. You don't need to
[Amit Varma]: go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Josie, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. It's a great privilege.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I've been waiting for a long time to ask you actually, I think we met at the Bangalore
[Amit Varma]: Lit Fest a couple of years ago. And I said, Hey, come on sometime and we'll discuss Feast
[Amit Varma]: of Vultures. But now we finally get to talk when your new excellent book is out, which
[Amit Varma]: everyone should read. And I hear that the first print run is also sold out. So congratulations
[Amit Varma]: for that. Before we sort of start talking about the book per se, I'd love to know a
[Amit Varma]: little bit more about your life. We are actually I think born in the same year 1973. I heard
[Amit Varma]: you reveal your year in this TEDx talk you gave. So tell me a little bit about where
[Amit Varma]: you grew up, what your early years were like that journey until you eventually became a
[Amit Varma]: journalist.
[Guest]: Amit, I was born in a very lower middle class family by the backwaters in Alleppey. My father
[Guest]: was an accountant, a local tax consultant. I always saw this great debate at home about
[Guest]: my dad's wild ambition for education and children and obsession with education. My mother was
[Guest]: more like, you know, saying that, look, pursuit of happiness is being happy for today, right?
[Guest]: So I always saw this great debate of pursuit of happiness between the two of them. But
[Guest]: together they ensured that. And we are four siblings. And, you know, my dad, when he heard
[Guest]: about Saini schools, someone from my village went and became a teacher in Saini school
[Guest]: in Trivandrum. So my father got obsessed with it. And he tried with my elder brothers who
[Guest]: couldn't. First one was overage, second one was underage, whatever. Anyway, I became the
[Guest]: guinea pig and after my first five years in schooling, I landed in Saini school, Trivandrum.
[Guest]: It's thanks to that socialist India, the government subsidized public school education that I
[Guest]: could speak English. I could learn English. Until then, I was in a Malayalam medium school.
[Guest]: I'm very acutely aware of the privileges of state subsidy that has done and the impact
[Guest]: it has on people like us. And I'm very proud of the fact that, you know, despite it's being
[Guest]: called a Saini school, I think it's a great public school for the poor and middle class
[Guest]: bright kids. And schools, Saini schools across India continues to produce hundreds of very
[Guest]: outstanding, in fact, thousands of outstanding professionals into military and outside. And
[Guest]: I think a lot of values are shared. And it is not overstating a fact to say that you
[Guest]: take a sample of Saini school products and you'll find them unusually high on integrity,
[Guest]: on morals, commitment to nationalism, etc, etc. So, I went to Saini school till 12th.
[Guest]: I came back home. My parents, my mother especially wanted, I told you the pursuit of happiness
[Guest]: debates. Mother wanted me to be home. So, I went to study BSc in mathematics. I was
[Guest]: quite a good student in mathematics. But after two years of doing well in mathematics, I
[Guest]: realized that my heart lies in writing and other things. Anyway, I completed mathematics
[Guest]: BSc and came to Delhi in the hope of becoming a civil servant. And I did the usual rounds
[Guest]: of civil service training institutes. And I think I paid money at Rao's academy also
[Guest]: to enroll. But one of those days happenstance happened and I landed up in Delhi midday office.
[Guest]: John Dale used to be the editor. A common acquaintance had introduced me to him. I went
[Guest]: to meet him. So, when I was there, he said Rajan Pillai, the biscuit tycoon who was running
[Guest]: Britannia and who was in a big legal corporate war. He had just disappeared from Singapore
[Guest]: and there was a manhunt for him, etc. So, he asked me to write a profile of Rajan Pillai
[Guest]: and I wrote that. And that changed my life. I never sat for civil service exam. I never
[Guest]: wanted to be one again because of the kick of writing, the fun of it all just hooked
[Guest]: me and the first article got me a lot of attention, a lot of local attention. So, I've been a
[Guest]: journalist since then. To satisfy parents that I'm studying, I did an evening course
[Guest]: in PG Diploma in Journalism in YMCA, where one of the teachers couldn't even… So, even
[Guest]: despite I topping his paper, he couldn't recognize me because I would very hardly go
[Guest]: to classes. I was busy in my practical journalism. That's how I became a journalist. So, there
[Guest]: is no other fancy story to it. It's a very average Indian story of this above average
[Guest]: student from an ordinary or a poor family managing to get to the city with education
[Guest]: and starting off with the limited options available to us in those days. I'm talking
[Guest]: about the early 90s. That's it. Liberalization was just happening around, but the benefits
[Guest]: were to raise the media houses. Journalism salaries were very low. Yeah, that's all.
[Amit Varma]: That's not all. There's a lot there that leads me to think of future questions. Firstly,
[Amit Varma]: I'm intrigued by the values you mentioned at Sainik School. So, what were those kind
[Amit Varma]: of values in the sense that you say that today you meet, you know, anybody from Sainik School,
[Amit Varma]: you can sort of that integrity is always there and so on. So, tell me a little bit more about
[Amit Varma]: that. And then when you encounter people outside of that environment, when you first did, did
[Amit Varma]: that difference become stark? Was there an awareness that there is one way that we have
[Amit Varma]: been taught to or that we have imbibed in terms of how we think about the world and
[Amit Varma]: what is actually happening out there, which in a sense, you spend the rest of your life
[Amit Varma]: uncovering what is actually happening out there is something totally different. Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about these sort of clash of values. And you know what that was like?
[Guest]: I don't know, Amit, if you went to a boarding school.
[Amit Varma]: I was for a while a day scholar in a school that was also a boarding school. So yeah.
[Guest]: So if you go to a boarding school, you are forever, you are a student, you know, and
[Guest]: they're your brothers. So I think one of the things that boarding schools does to you is
[Guest]: that it becomes a very close knit community. And so you are almost naked before them for
[Guest]: a lifetime. So I think there's a lot of, you know, if I may put it in a positive way, peer
[Guest]: pressure to be good and to do good. This is one of my theories about, I got several theories
[Guest]: about boarding school. One of it is this. Second is that on every Sunday morning, boarding
[Guest]: school boys have to rub their bathrooms instead of going to church. I like to do that. So
[Guest]: I think the bonding that you create in boarding schools have a very positive impact. But there
[Guest]: is another aspect, which is where Indian military and military ethos come in. We can criticize
[Guest]: the military for a lot of things, but I think Indian military, luckily for India, has built
[Guest]: a very strong moralistic framework. It's not 100% perfect. There are problems with it.
[Guest]: So because the senior schools are run by the military officers, they bring in a certain
[Guest]: kind of idealism, which is quite naive in many ways, but it helps. And there is a strong
[Guest]: foundation to it. And I think the third factor to add to it is that, you know, between all
[Guest]: of us, the boarding school gang, we are almost every day talking to each other, right? The
[Guest]: conversations, the concerns we share are the same. The appreciations I receive from them,
[Guest]: they're my biggest fans and supporters. So it all comes together. And then when I came
[Guest]: out into the public life, and even today, very honestly, despite doing all the so-called
[Guest]: journalism and all that, I still get fooled by a lot of people. A lot of people take me
[Guest]: for a ride and I find it, sometimes I feel, and I know, I know that somebody is taking
[Guest]: me for a ride, even when it takes me a lot of time to turn around and tell that person,
[Guest]: boss, enough is enough, you know. So, but that's, that's part of the personality too,
[Guest]: I suppose. But yeah, it is very stark. So I think Indian society, per se, at large,
[Guest]: we are an amoral society, not even immoral. We can't, you know, when I'm in New Delhi,
[Guest]: when I meet with certain kind of people, I think that they can't even make the difference
[Guest]: between immoral and moral. They're so blinded by the pursuit of wealth and power, which
[Guest]: we see all around. And to me, it is amusing and it agitates me. And maybe that agitation
[Guest]: is what helps me to do some stories that I've done or continue to do stories that I do.
[Guest]: Because all of their greed of the politicians or the bureaucrat or corporates, that greed
[Guest]: comes at the cost of people like us. People like us, meaning the poor, ordinary Indians,
[Guest]: you know, the ones who go to bed hungry with their stomachs turning. So it comes at a cost.
[Guest]: That angers me. And a lot of my journalism comes out of it. And that anger is something
[Guest]: that it continues to boil in me. And despite I being in my late 40s, it hasn't gone down.
[Guest]: If anything, my anger has only gone up.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm struck by the use of the word immoral in what you just said. And that leads me to
[Amit Varma]: a slightly sideways pondering, which is that, you know, one could argue that morality is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the luxury of those who don't have an empty stomach. And otherwise, in a really
[Amit Varma]: poor country, when you're desperate, when you're scrambling, you know, do you really
[Amit Varma]: have the luxury to be moral and it you know, everything comes down to that circumstance.
[Amit Varma]: And also, many of our values are in fact, shaped by the institutions around us and by
[Amit Varma]: what is actually happening in our society. Like one of the musings and one of the questions
[Amit Varma]: that I frequently asked people on the show, including economists, but you know, you might
[Amit Varma]: have a thought on it. So I'll air it as well. It refers to this whole Jagdish Bhagwati observation
[Amit Varma]: about how Indians tend to be rent seeking while Chinese seek to be profit seeking. Profit
[Amit Varma]: seeking meaning obviously that the only way they can make a profit is by making someone
[Amit Varma]: else better off and it's a positive sum game and blah, blah, blah. And I don't know enough
[Amit Varma]: about China to know how true that is. But Indians certainly are rent seeking in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that even today in 2021, a lot of people when they think of starting a business, it's
[Amit Varma]: the thinking is how do I con somebody? Isko, you know, chootiya kaise banao, if I might
[Amit Varma]: use unparliamentary language, and that's kind of how it is. And my theory always was that
[Amit Varma]: the reason we are rent seeking is not something fundamentally wrong with our culture, but
[Amit Varma]: it's partly a result of the institutions we've had since independence, when the state had
[Amit Varma]: such a domineering role and private enterprise was so suppressed, that the only way to really
[Amit Varma]: get ahead and to make money and all of that was through in some way or the other, using
[Amit Varma]: the state to make yourself better off or using that power to make yourself better off, which
[Amit Varma]: is why so many successful capitalists were really crony capitalists not functioning in
[Amit Varma]: a free market, but with the hand of the state, helping them and so on. Now, a significant
[Amit Varma]: part of your book also demonstrates how people everywhere are responding to incentives, people
[Amit Varma]: within the security establishment, bureaucrats, politicians, whatever. And indeed, when you
[Amit Varma]: were saying you were studying for the civil services, I just wondered for a moment that
[Amit Varma]: had you joined the civil servants, you know, who knows, maybe you would have turned into
[Amit Varma]: one of them, but maybe your Sanic school values would have shaped you. So you have a comment
[Guest]: to make on this? See, I think we are not reading the Indian society right when we, if we were
[Guest]: to say that we are rent seekers, for a moment, look at history in the broad sense. So I don't
[Guest]: know if you know this book called, it's called Geography of Geniuses. What is that book?
[Guest]: So there is this book where, I have it somewhere here, where he argues that geniuses usually
[Guest]: you find them in clusters in ancient Greek or in Calcutta during the century ago, etc.
[Guest]: But if you look at India of the 19, last century's first part, some of the geniuses of our times
[Guest]: were born or lived from Gandhi to Ambedkar. And today when you read their debates, their
[Guest]: papers, their books, you realize that probably they were an unusual moment in history, even
[Guest]: unusually gifted, great people came together and they just disappeared. And those who followed
[Guest]: them did not have the vision or the capability to sustain what they created for us. Now,
[Guest]: even today, when we talk about rent seekers, we also have people like the prime G's of
[Guest]: the world who are doing fantastic work without any compromise. And I think, I think there
[Guest]: are, we can find a lot of businessmen out there who are doing things without being rent
[Guest]: seekers, who are doing admirable work. So, I don't know what exactly Dindesh Bhagawati's
[Guest]: argument is, and I'm not qualified to challenge or critique him because he is such a brilliant
[Guest]: academic. My theory is that the democratic degeneration that has been happening is spreading
[Guest]: and degeneration has two things that happens. One is what you said, which is that when it
[Guest]: is degenerating, and because we are frustrated with the state controls, etc., but in a degenerated
[Guest]: society, we take the path of least resistance, most of us. So, you are in a degenerated state
[Guest]: and you become one of them. Otherwise, standing up to it is not a great idea. It's not good
[Guest]: for your health. The other thing is when moved, when India moved from the socialist state,
[Guest]: the import substitution policies, etc., into a liberalized economy, we did not make a clean
[Guest]: migration into a clean marketplace. We just shifted all the crap of that old days into
[Guest]: the new marketplace and said, oh, our economy is going to boom. What boom was it? You look
[Guest]: at corridors like Bundelkhand to Delhi, Bihar to Bombay, etc. These are modern day slaves.
[Guest]: Millions are coming to your cities and they're building your infrastructure. Your economic
[Guest]: boom is mostly on construction of apartments, roads, airports, etc. So, we haven't actually
[Guest]: created an entrepreneurial marketplace, which would actually reform and improve democracy,
[Guest]: as you know, except in Singapore. All over the world, when you have entrepreneurial class
[Guest]: emerging, they demand better accountability, etc. Except for Bangalore city, I don't know
[Guest]: how many citizens is dominated, economy is dominated by entrepreneurship and innovations,
[Guest]: etc. So, what I'm saying is that one is that many of the people who would actually want
[Guest]: to be good in life are forced to do the immoral acts because they want a good night's sleep.
[Guest]: They want their family to be safe. They don't want to be threatened. They don't want to
[Guest]: face legal challenges, etc. The second is, over the years, from that Gandhi and Nehruvian
[Guest]: Ambedkarite values of unbelievable intellect, we have come to a stage where you have leaders
[Guest]: who ridicule higher education, who ridicule scientific temperament and make all kinds
[Guest]: of rubbish claims. And you have given power away to criminals. The state has been virtually
[Guest]: captured by criminal elements at various levels. You might call them political families or
[Guest]: political stars or whatever it is. But the reality is that if you really look at them,
[Guest]: remove all the aura around them, remove the constitutional positions around them, and
[Guest]: who are they? Murder accused, riot accused, cheats. So, we are not just rent seekers.
[Guest]: I'm saying there is a good India which is not being allowed to come up and speak. That
[Guest]: India is only allowed to speak and act in conversations with Amit or in some literary
[Guest]: festivals or in some small groups or on Signal or WhatsApp these days. The marketplace and
[Guest]: the mainstream of Indian democracy has been taken over by criminals, by rent seekers etc.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean that we Indians are all rent seekers. You and I are not.
[Amit Varma]: I think what Bhagwati kind of meant was exactly what you're saying, that this is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what the system has created. You've incentivized rent seekers. My brief bunch of responses
[Amit Varma]: to what you said. One is, of course, I agree about the quality of the leaders that emerged
[Amit Varma]: in the first part of the last century. And I, in fact, wrote a column also once addressing
[Amit Varma]: this popular question that why were our freedom fighters of such high caliber, where our leaders
[Amit Varma]: today are not of the high caliber. And my argument was that you just have to look at
[Amit Varma]: the incentives, that the people who came up then, they had no power to lust for, there
[Amit Varma]: were no riches or power at the end of the line for them. They were animated purely by
[Amit Varma]: principles, perhaps even the kind of principles that sanic school students would approve of.
[Amit Varma]: And they were willing to sacrifice a lot for that. So obviously, you get a certain caliber
[Amit Varma]: there. So there's a self selection there. Anyone who is devoting their life to that
[Amit Varma]: kind of work is obviously going to be a higher quality of person. Whereas post independence,
[Amit Varma]: what we designed at independence was essentially a predatory state. Therefore, you'll get leaders
[Amit Varma]: then like that who are attracted by the lust for power, which doesn't carry with it safeguards
[Amit Varma]: or accountability or any of that, where we are a democracy without really being a republic
[Amit Varma]: in the true sense. I think that's kind of been an issue there. And I also agree that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, 1991, I would say we didn't liberalize enough, we didn't do enough to unleash the
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneurial spirits of our people. I think it did a lot of good, it got your 300 million
[Amit Varma]: people out of poverty and all of that. But the point is, it was very far from a magic
[Amit Varma]: pill, obviously, look at the state of the country. And if, if anything, we've gone backwards
[Amit Varma]: in the last 10 years, so it's pretty dire. But we'll kind of come to more, you know,
[Amit Varma]: details of that direness when we speak about your book, I want to go a little back into
[Amit Varma]: your past life. I do want to talk about your journalistic years. But even before that,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned that, you know, you did the BSc in math, because you had started doing
[Amit Varma]: it and you said, Okay, I'll finish it. But you were more interested in writing, which
[Amit Varma]: obviously means that you were reading a lot, because that's how you one becomes interested
[Amit Varma]: in writing. So tell me about the books you read, and you know, who influenced you? You
[Amit Varma]: know, who were the writers you used to look up to during that period? Give me some sense
[Amit Varma]: of that. And when you said you wanted to write, what kind of writing did you want to do? Take
[Amit Varma]: me into the mind of the teenager, Josie.
[Guest]: I feel very embarrassed talking about myself too much. So, you know, when we were 25 years
[Guest]: after we were out of boarding school, friends were talking about each other, there was some
[Guest]: kind of recall about who we were as children. And I was surprised to know that when I was
[Guest]: 11, 12, I used to tell my friends that I want to be a journalist. I didn't know I couldn't
[Guest]: recall those, but everyone else recalled the fact that I always was. I was always fond
[Guest]: of and yeah, I mean, I was, I think I was a voracious reader. And I think my reading
[Guest]: has now come down to more specific reading. But yeah, I mean, like any good Mallu, you
[Guest]: finish Kafka and Kamyu by the age of 11, sorry, 16 and 17. And you are wrapping up Marquez
[Guest]: and others. So, you know, they are all brothers for us, right? For all the Mallus and Bongs.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, you know, like we read a lot of Soviet, the communist literature. So
[Guest]: I've read all of the Indian Hindu classics, Mahabharata, Ramayana. In fact, I know more
[Guest]: of Ramayana, Mahabharata than Bible. And so classics, of course, and then I switched to
[Guest]: very serious reading of the modern and postmodern writers. When I was, as I was moving into
[Guest]: my teenage years and we had a network in school where we all shared. I don't know, there are
[Guest]: some books, you don't know for what reason it remains with you. For example, there was
[Guest]: a book by James Michener called On Poland, if I'm not wrong. So it stuck with me about
[Guest]: this little country, which is like the, you know, everyone who comes to Soviet Union,
[Guest]: goes back, everybody walks over Poland, right? So those kinds of things stuck with me. And
[Guest]: for a long time in my college years, I was very deeply into serious literature, reading
[Guest]: and magical realism and classics, etc. And I think that influences a lot of my writing.
[Guest]: If you see, I make this very foolish attempts to ape certain creative writing in my nonfiction.
[Guest]: So yeah, then after that phase, after I came to Delhi, and when I hit kind of a plateau
[Guest]: reading fiction, and I couldn't, I wasn't very happy with the new fiction stuff that
[Guest]: was coming out. And because of journalism, I shifted to reading nonfiction. And I don't
[Guest]: know what it was, I started reading a lot of history and biographies. And I love large
[Guest]: events. I like to read about, you know, so I you'll see a lot of those kind of books
[Guest]: behind me. Now I read so for the last 20-25 years, except for a few fiction books, I have
[Guest]: only read nonfiction and nonfiction very seriously. And but when you're writing a book, as you
[Guest]: know, you're reading mostly stuff related to writing because you need to be in that
[Guest]: world, right? So, you know, I was rereading Basharat Peer and Rahul Pantipa, etc. for
[Guest]: the book. And now I am reading Transfer of Power Papers and a lot of the history books
[Guest]: of 4740 because I'm working on something new with my team. So yeah, now the readings are
[Guest]: much more focused. Unless cumbered, I don't read fiction anymore. But yeah, I've read
[Guest]: enough fiction to hold a conversation on Latch America or African writers.
[Amit Varma]: It's also evident in your writing because I just thought that, you know, reading your
[Amit Varma]: latest book, the storytelling was excellent in it, you know, which is something narrative
[Amit Varma]: nonfiction writers over the last 40-50 years have certainly picked up from fiction writing
[Amit Varma]: using novelistic techniques, the way you build a story, the way you structure it, all of
[Amit Varma]: it was there, it was very interesting. It's not linear, there are interesting things happening,
[Amit Varma]: there are back and forths and all of that, which I really enjoyed. So, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: you joined journalism, what was your notion of what makes for an ideal journalist? In
[Amit Varma]: the sense that I remember back in the 90s, as I reached adulthood and all of that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, today, the internet is ubiquitous, we take it for granted, we can read journalism
[Amit Varma]: from all over the world. That was obviously not the case, then we just had the handful
[Amit Varma]: of Indian newspapers and those weekly news magazines like India Today and Sunday and
[Amit Varma]: all to look at. So how does one form a model of journalism when you say you when your friends
[Amit Varma]: say you wanted to be a journalist before that, what was your conception of it? What excited
[Amit Varma]: you about journalism per se? And as you got into it, how did your notion of journalism
[Amit Varma]: evolve in a sense? Like, where do you begin to anchor yourself in terms of the values
[Amit Varma]: that journalism should have? And which is an especially relevant question for me to
[Amit Varma]: ask you, because when I look around the journalistic landscape today, you seem a little bit of
[Amit Varma]: an outlier, which of course, I mean, entirely as a compliment.
[Guest]: It's interesting that you're asking me this, because you know, the first thing I did, I
[Guest]: after I landed in Delhi, because I signed a school, we had a well stocked library, not
[Guest]: the greatest library. Then I came home, where the local college where I did my graduation
[Guest]: had a very ordinary library, very poor library. And I would buy those Malayalam magazines.
[Guest]: Because my Malayalam was poor, so I re-read to improve my language. When I came to Delhi,
[Guest]: the first thing that I did was my brother, who is an army officer, I asked him to take
[Guest]: me to all the major libraries and we took membership in every one of them. So the American
[Guest]: Center, the British Library, Saithya Academy Library, even Municipal Library in Sarojiniwar,
[Guest]: and for several months before I became a full-time journalist, my job was to go to, I was just
[Guest]: in and out of libraries. I would go spend days, read up, bring books, go back, you know
[Guest]: what I'm saying, you know how it is to be. And I came to Delhi sometime in November,
[Guest]: by the summer of next summer, I was into mid-day full-time job. Now, again, with a lot of this
[Guest]: pseudo intellectual impressions and ambitions, I go into a newsroom, and my very first feature
[Guest]: has this slight, you know, impresses the crowd around. And then I'm writing things about
[Guest]: films, I'm comparing Schindler's List and Maniratnam's Bombay, and people are appreciating.
[Guest]: And one day, you know, my editor tells me, listen, there is a press conference by Madanlal
[Guest]: Khurana, the Chief Minister of Delhi, go and attend it. I'm a sub-editor on the desk, I'm
[Guest]: not a reporter. So I go with the reporter to attend, and he's speaking in Punjabi. I
[Guest]: couldn't understand a word of it. So I came back and told the editor, sir, you know, I
[Guest]: can't be a reporter in the city, I don't understand, I hardly understand Hindi and Punjabi, especially.
[Guest]: So he said, precisely because you don't understand language, you should become a reporter. Because
[Guest]: languages do not matter. You should be able and capable and confident to report anywhere
[Guest]: in the world. You will need an interpreter at best, right? And a lot of things are said,
[Guest]: and a lot of things that the most crucial observations are not based on words. And he
[Guest]: pushed me into reporting. And I started reporting on the ground. And that is when I woke up
[Guest]: to the reality that despite all my family's financial issues or struggles, I came from
[Guest]: a very cocooned, privileged, democratic society in Kerala, where it was a stark contrast here.
[Guest]: Here I was out there in hospitals where children are being stolen. I was going to police stations
[Guest]: where torture is like a daily routine. I was going into government offices and getting
[Guest]: these, you know, I mean, they're bargaining in front of you, the bribes, etc. The life
[Guest]: was different. So, I mean, for me, the wake up happened during those days. And I abandoned
[Guest]: all my intellectual pretensions. And I said, this is the India that I should report and
[Guest]: write about. And I became a reporter. And I became a reporter in a very aggressive manner.
[Guest]: And since then, I'm very happy to say that till date, I may have not carried stories,
[Guest]: but I have not dropped a story because someone could influence me. I refuse to be compromised.
[Guest]: I refuse to give in to any threats, intimidations, legal cases, because it's, it makes me angry
[Guest]: because we are a very rich country of too many corrupt and poor people. That's it. Sometime
[Guest]: in around that time, I stopped reading fiction. I started getting into understanding what's
[Guest]: here and now. And years later, as I was, later I became a defense correspondent, and I was
[Guest]: bringing a lot of defense scams and stories. But then I realized that defense is a very
[Guest]: small part of the society. So that's when I decided to do a master's where I could learn
[Guest]: more subjects and develop more frameworks. And I'm very clear that if our voices don't
[Guest]: echo and resonate here and now, it has no value in the future. I don't want to be a
[Guest]: Franz Kafka. You know that I've become famous after my death with my novels. It doesn't
[Guest]: matter. I want to be, I mean, I need to be doing my bit to make the society better for
[Guest]: my daughter and her generation. So that's a wake up that I had in my 20s.
[Amit Varma]: I was chatting with a good friend of mine who happens to be an old colleague of yours,
[Amit Varma]: Prem Panikkar. So I called him this morning and I said, tell me a little bit about Josie.
[Amit Varma]: And Prem was full of nothing but praise. And one of the first things he said, which struck
[Amit Varma]: me was that Josie was a quintessential beat journalist. And he said that there are no
[Amit Varma]: beat journalists anymore. And obviously, in those early years, your beat was security.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, the security establishment you've written about in this new book. So a couple
[Amit Varma]: of questions there. One, what made you sort of choose that beat? Was it a kind of serendipity
[Amit Varma]: that those are the kind of stories you started doing and you just kind of stuck with it?
[Amit Varma]: And two, the other thing is that, you know, typically, you imagine a beat reporter is
[Amit Varma]: someone who, you know, your editor tells you, okay, this is your beat, you're covering housing
[Amit Varma]: or you're covering crime or you're covering whatever. And the beat reporter does that
[Amit Varma]: till they get moved on to the next beat. But it seems to me that your commitment to your
[Amit Varma]: beat also comes out of the kind of conviction that you just articulated, that it was important
[Amit Varma]: to do this work, that you were animated by that also, it is not just a job, I have been
[Amit Varma]: told to do this, and so on. So take me a little bit through, you know, your mindset, why this
[Amit Varma]: beat? What drove you about it?
[Guest]: So I'm in midday and by 95, I become a full time reporter reporting municipal issues,
[Guest]: local government, whatever. And I get hired by Asian Edge, MJ Akbar hires me, Seema Musaf
[Guest]: as my boss, because he's launching Delhi Edge, which is a local reporting section of the
[Guest]: paper. I'm the chief reporter there. I mean, I'm like overseeing the reporting. And I'm
[Guest]: doing well. And I try to do some national stories occasionally. And I broke a few stories
[Guest]: in the first NDA government. I don't know if you recall, there was a proposal to make
[Guest]: Sanskrit compulsory in schools. And they also wanted to teach kitchen hack habits to girls.
[Guest]: So I broke all the stories. And you know, so I was taking a like, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: I was doing stories. So one of those days, Admiral Vishnu Bhagat was dismissed as a Navy
[Guest]: chief. And the reporting was largely controlled by the government. And that's when Akbar
[Guest]: told me to start reporting on defense. And I got into, so because of that, I from day
[Guest]: one, besides my science school background and my acquaintance with a lot of good officers,
[Guest]: I got right into the heart of the little degeneration in the military-civilian relationship. And
[Guest]: Kargil happened. So you're sucked in. So beat reporting is, you know, you can't decide these
[Guest]: things. So Kargil happened. And I broke a few of the early stories about patrols going
[Guest]: missing. And one day when the war is happening, I wrote about Brigadier Surendra Singh, who
[Guest]: was then the brigade commander of Kargil, being removed from command. And also his boss
[Guest]: being removed from command. Next day, military intelligence chief himself, MI chief himself
[Guest]: writes a letter to MJ Akbar saying that, I have been fooled by an ISI module. And they've
[Guest]: detected 26 ISI modules, which are trying to demoralize the military at, you know, a
[Guest]: nation at war. I was immediately taken off the defense beat by my editor. And then articles
[Guest]: came out. Luckily, I didn't get arrested or anything. But 10 days later, I was proved
[Guest]: right when army admitted that the transfer actually had happened. So I was getting into
[Guest]: the defense and parallelly the intelligence apparatus, because that completes the, and
[Guest]: the white collar agencies, right. So I was getting into that segment. And I was breaking
[Guest]: stories and especially because I was doing stories which were anti-establishment, I got
[Guest]: a lot more attention. And that's when Rediff called me. As the Kargil war entered, I left
[Guest]: because I couldn't stay there because, you know, I was virtually left hanging, hung to
[Guest]: dry because of a story I brought about Surendra Singh's transfer, when my editors couldn't
[Guest]: stand with me. So the moment Rediff offer came, I left. I left actually, I think on
[Guest]: the day of the ceasefire declaration, I left, resigned. Went to Rediff and there also, Rediff
[Guest]: was those days one of the greatest journalism, I think. I haven't worked in a more idealistic
[Guest]: newsroom than Rediff of those days. We had Nikhil Laxman, Prem Panicker, Sai, Sheila
[Guest]: Budletter. So what happened was that because Rediff was then well funded and all that,
[Guest]: you know, there was much more travel budget. And I did my own Padmashis there, you know,
[Guest]: so I would go to Kashmir, stay in a rented house, go and try and interview militants,
[Guest]: go to Nepal, all that. But what it did was because I was not a jingoistic guy, because
[Guest]: I was not enamored by military or intelligence. And because I was not taken up by these, you
[Guest]: know, crazy stories, some of these chaps would try to spin around you. I was always clear
[Guest]: headed. So, you know, like, sometime I wrote something against army and the army's PRO,
[Guest]: not PRO, the ADGP, the senior chap called me and said, we are going to blacklist you.
[Guest]: So I said, so the liquor will be sent home. So he said, meaning what? I mean, he was a
[Guest]: stiff infantry officer. I said, sir, you're putting me on some list, you said, right?
[Guest]: So is it a privilege list where you send liquor home or what is it? He said, don't you understand
[Guest]: I'm going to blacklist you. So I said, sir, who bothers? It's a democracy, right? You
[Guest]: blacklist, brownlist, whatever you want to do it, I'll do my job. But if I'm factually
[Guest]: wrong, you should tell me. I still believe that journalism, especially if you're covering
[Guest]: security establishment, it cannot be for popularity. And in fact, most of the bosses in agencies
[Guest]: want you to do propaganda, not journalism. And I've had repeated experience with chiefs
[Guest]: of agencies, organizations who have been very fond of me. But at the most crucial moment,
[Guest]: they will try to mislead you. So I have always been very clear headed about it. And mind
[Guest]: you, somewhere in my mind, I'm a Gandhian, I hate violence, I hate wars. So it became
[Guest]: a very contradictory life. On the one side, I did not like this idea of nation states,
[Guest]: you know, guarding the borders, the security dilemmas it create for each other. On the
[Guest]: other side, I was getting sucked more and more into the security apparatus of the world
[Guest]: of the country and the region. This went on. And I was in, then I, from Rediff I went back
[Guest]: to Times, Times of India, then I came back to launch DNA with Ayyaz Mehman and Pradeep
[Guest]: Go and all that. It was while in DNA that I decided that enough of writing about defense
[Guest]: and intelligence alone, I need to understand India better. And I decided to do a part time
[Guest]: master's where I went on to study 12-13 subjects from economics to international trade and
[Guest]: policy to negotiations, etc. That is when I, when I was called back by Times of India,
[Guest]: Jojo asked me to come back to Times of India. I told him that I don't want to be a defense
[Guest]: reporter. I don't want to waste, I can. So I became editor of special projects doing
[Guest]: only special investigative stories. And Jojo gave me a free hand for some, a lot of, I
[Guest]: mean, I had a lot of free hand in Times for a long time. So my investigations expanded.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I continued to do stories on the intelligence, defense, security establishment.
[Amit Varma]: One of the interesting strands that you've spoken about in your book is how the security
[Amit Varma]: establishment tries to control the narrative. And you've spoken about how, in fact, they
[Amit Varma]: tried to co-opt you at different points in time. They said they'll pay for your master's
[Amit Varma]: when you go abroad and so on. And you, of course, refused because, hey, Sanik school
[Amit Varma]: values. But my question here is that then when you get into that beat, obviously, the
[Amit Varma]: key commodity, which is important for you is information. And you get information from
[Amit Varma]: sources. And yet, if many of your sources are insiders within the establishment, when
[Amit Varma]: they know that you are not someone who will swallow the narrative necessarily, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and when it may not be in their interest for to speak to you, how do you go about cultivating
[Amit Varma]: sources and given that so much is smoke and mirrors, you don't know whether a single thing
[Amit Varma]: that is being told to you is necessarily true. And it must be at some point in time hard
[Amit Varma]: to corroborate things which are being told to you. So how did you navigate all of that?
[Amit Varma]: Like, were there times where you think you made a mistake that you'd followed a certain
[Amit Varma]: narrative or whatever, and it wasn't the case? And also over a period of time, how do you
[Amit Varma]: build your you know, your bullshit detection radar as it were, and this cultivation of
[Amit Varma]: sources especially in a field like this? How does it happen? Because you know, being a
[Amit Varma]: cricket journalist for a while, and it's worse today, it was better than but if you got to
[Amit Varma]: a critical of cricketers, you would just lose access, or the BCCI would just drop access
[Amit Varma]: if you messed with them, which was always fine for me, because I was more of big picture
[Amit Varma]: kind of guy, I didn't do so much reporting, and I didn't really care about the access.
[Amit Varma]: But for those who actually have to write about what's going on inside the dressing room,
[Amit Varma]: I can't imagine getting that information without access. So take me through the life of a beat
[Amit Varma]: journalist in that regard, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I mean, that's where I want to go back to that, the rent seeking behavior we
[Guest]: said, so there are, there are great Indians, there are great people out there in every
[Guest]: agency, every organization, they may not be the most famous. But if you get to the right
[Guest]: people, you don't need too many sources, I don't need 100 sources to scoop the stories,
[Guest]: I only need five of them, right? They need to trust you. And they should have the courage
[Guest]: to tell you the truth and reach out to you, right? So everything else is smoke and screen,
[Guest]: everything else is bullshit. So I would be spending an entire day with people who are
[Guest]: trying to mislead me. But I won't take a word from I'll go back. So if something doesn't
[Guest]: appear to my common sense, I usually drop it. I got my own criterias about accepting
[Guest]: information, accessing documents, etc, which I've developed over the years, which is not
[Guest]: foolproof. But I think many of it works. For example, if somebody were to give you a document,
[Guest]: and that person is not the first, the primary source handling the document, I will not use
[Guest]: it unless I can verify it. So if you give me a file, and if you are handling that file,
[Guest]: I will trust you, my trust on you will be much higher. But if you are not handling the
[Guest]: file, you are giving somebody else's file to me, I would not use it unless I can verify
[Guest]: it. But a lot of reporters run with files sensitive, especially if it's interesting.
[Guest]: So in all agencies, there are great human beings out there, fantastic people, courageous
[Guest]: people, people who are more courageous than all of us, at least people like you and me
[Guest]: get recognition, right? We sell books, people make movies on us. People listen to us. But
[Guest]: those are our real heroes, the ones in the organization. So quietly sit there. And when
[Guest]: they see something going wrong, they would reach out to people like me and tell us that,
[Guest]: listen, this is what's happening, you need to write about it. That loose network of whistleblowers
[Guest]: in many ways, who are around me are enabling me to do this work. So I'm not a James Bond
[Guest]: or anything. These people provide information. That's one part. The second part, which is
[Guest]: to me very interesting is in the agencies, there are various kinds of people. Then the
[Guest]: second kind of one, I told you, these courageous ones are the foundations for great journalism.
[Guest]: Second are the kind of people who are careerists, who will bribe journalists, whatever they
[Guest]: want. But many of them have a good quality, which is that once they know that you are
[Guest]: not a bullshitter and you should not be bullshitted around, they usually withdraw. They will give
[Guest]: you a respect and space, but they may not entertain you too much. But if you ask a question,
[Guest]: they will not go quiet. They know that this fellow has to be answered to, even if you
[Guest]: don't tell the truth. There is a third kind, which is the, you can't do anything to them.
[Guest]: They are in their fantasy world, they'll bribe, kick, whatever shit. So you just ignore them.
[Guest]: So there are people, I don't want to take names, who have held very, very powerful positions
[Guest]: in this country, who have wanted to meet me, they refuse to meet them. Very powerful people.
[Guest]: I said, no, I know he wants to meet me because he wants to plant some information and use
[Guest]: my byline to bring credibility to him. I'm not going to, my byline is not on rent. It's
[Guest]: not on sale for you. I know very clearly. So I refuse to meet some people. The consequences
[Guest]: are there, you pay for it, but that's okay. So between these three, I think my life has
[Guest]: been very good. I've been able to do enough stories to get attention from people like
[Amit Varma]: you. So yeah, get attention from people like me. You're pushing it now. And I hope people
[Amit Varma]: make films on your life, but nobody's going to make a film on mine. So you know, in your
[Amit Varma]: book, you mentioned the carrot, which we've just spoken about, that they tried to co-opt
[Amit Varma]: you, and you know, somebody spoke to you about a monthly retainer, and to fund your studies
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. What about the stick, which is not something that you mentioned in this
[Amit Varma]: book, and which I assume must be there, because one of the things that struck me while reading
[Amit Varma]: this book was the way that you speak of people who are still extremely, you know, prominent
[Amit Varma]: today in the police in Delhi, for example, who's active in Gujarat under Mr. Modi, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and even people like Amit Shah, for example, I mean, these are incredibly powerful
[Amit Varma]: people, you have not put any filters out there, you're basically just laying it out all out
[Amit Varma]: on the page for everyone to read, of course, and for your last book, you were sued for
[Amit Varma]: enormous amounts of money, which you cannot possibly possess with your sanic school values.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how you then deal with the stick, you know, and I imagine
[Amit Varma]: that when you're single is probably easier, but when you have a family, two practical
[Amit Varma]: considerations, then come into mind, how does that kind of work? I'm presuming you must
[Amit Varma]: have been threatened, there must have been intimidation, take me through that.
[Guest]: So that this is where the script goes off the track. Because you ask a question like
[Guest]: this to a journalist, and then he becomes a hero of the story. Then he said, then he
[Guest]: said boasting, you know, and I keep saying this to people that, you know, if the reporter
[Guest]: tries to be the hero of the story, you will end up being one story wonder.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but you know something, you're not writing this story. This is my story. If I want to
[Guest]: make you the hero, I'll make you the hero.
[Guest]: So you know, there are some ground I'll tell you. So other day, you know, last week morning
[Guest]: context, some reporter called me and was talking about surveillance. He was doing an article.
[Guest]: So he asked me, sir, how did you take protection? So I passingly told him an anecdote from my
[Guest]: life, which then I can see so many people are sharing, which was about, you know, like,
[Guest]: so I've been I mean, ever since I've been a reporter, I've been aware that for most
[Guest]: part of my career, I've been trailed by some agency or the other. So once I broke Naval
[Guest]: War Room leak case in DNA and I was being trailed by the Naval Intelligence people,
[Guest]: I think, or IB. So, you know, every day I would drive back in the evening and routine
[Guest]: I'll come in, park my car inside. And there is a Maruti van, which used to follow me.
[Guest]: And they will be parked outside the apartment complex. And I detected it. And after two
[Guest]: days, I told my wife, you know, we'll so she's also a journalist, Priya is, you know, we
[Guest]: are for this. So it was easy to talk to her about this thing. And my daughter Supriya
[Guest]: was very small. So we started switching off the light early in our apartment. So the moment
[Guest]: you switch off the light, they are babus, they go back, right? There are no James Bonds
[Guest]: in this country. Let's be honest, if somebody pretends to be James Bond, he's bullshitting.
[Guest]: There are people who are doing professional work, good work, but no James Bonds. So they
[Guest]: would go back and then I would come out and take my car and go and meet my source and
[Guest]: come back. So from that to being served with dozens of defamation notice and parliamentary
[Guest]: privilege notice and this and that, one goes through it and also nobody has come and beaten
[Guest]: me up. But very in a sweet way of threatening, very nicely you get threatened. But to me,
[Guest]: the most bizarre fact, not bizarre, most interesting aspect is when you talk loudly in the public
[Guest]: square like me, many of them actually either try to ignore you or try to co-opt you. Meaning
[Guest]: the rewards available to you not to speak the next time are very positive. Huge money,
[Guest]: huge favors, etc. That's what I would say. But then there is also a larger reality. Amit,
[Guest]: you know, in India, in a year, one and a half lakh people die on our roads. How many journalists
[Guest]: die on the line of duty? So I think being a journalist is far safer than being on the
[Guest]: Indian road. So we have to find solace really from such statistics, which may be absurd
[Guest]: comparisons. Yeah, but on a serious note, Amit, if you are writing, if you are somebody
[Guest]: who is committed to writing about the here and now of the society and what's happening
[Guest]: around, then between your fingertips and the keyboard, you cannot have prejudices. You
[Guest]: cannot speculate what my words might mean and what it can bring to me. You will have
[Guest]: to write with the courage, you will have to write with the awareness that you are going
[Guest]: to be lonely. Not very many people are going to defend you. And the process itself can
[Guest]: be the punishment, which could begin any moment. And I write with that awareness, but I don't
[Amit Varma]: write with censorship as you must have noticed. You mentioned that people threatened you in
[Amit Varma]: a nice way. So what would a nice way of threatening somebody be? Can you give me an example?
[Guest]: See in a city like Delhi, everyone knows everyone around. So when you are trying to do something
[Guest]: on Mr. X, Mr. Y, who might be a lawyer or some fixer, we'll meet you for a coffee and
[Guest]: say that, look, I heard you are doing something on so and so. Why do you want to do it? He
[Guest]: is a rascal, badmash. Do you want me to talk to him? Why don't you meet him? So it's that
[Guest]: way. It's threat combined with the other thing. The other is that some people actually do
[Guest]: fixing at the other end. When they know that I am working on something, which is something
[Guest]: very strange I've realized, they would do setting at the other end and come to you and
[Guest]: say that, look, I know that you are doing something on so and so. We've got a budget.
[Guest]: Why don't we just split it? Then there are people who make money out of you and showing
[Guest]: their proximity to you and they will tell somebody, look, I'll ensure that he doesn't
[Guest]: write against you. So one day somebody got drunk and from his mouth it came out. He told
[Guest]: somebody, he boasted saying that, you know, Josie will never write against me. And his
[Guest]: drinking companion came and told me, I said, why? Because he said, oh, he said you are
[Guest]: being managed. So it operates at multiple layers, multiple levels, because of which
[Guest]: one thing I don't do is I don't go drinking with people. I don't even go to press club
[Guest]: to drink. If I don't want to drink, I drink at home, you know, I avoid those companies,
[Guest]: because you will never know in a political city like Delhi who is on to what game. So
[Guest]: when I say sweet threats, it can be any of this. That's so fascinating. So now I know
[Amit Varma]: that there's a managing Josie Joseph economy out there for scammers. So prominent people
[Amit Varma]: in India will be getting emails not from Nigerian fraudsters, but from people saying, hey, we'll
[Amit Varma]: manage Josie is on your case, but we'll manage him. You may not even know who they are. Tell
[Amit Varma]: me also then about what are the kind of knowledge management systems that you have gathered
[Amit Varma]: over the years in terms of just managing all the knowledge that you're taking in. And especially
[Amit Varma]: as we get older, and we're pretty much the same age, I realized that my memory kind of
[Amit Varma]: is very unreliable. And, you know, something I might have read two weeks ago, I would completely
[Amit Varma]: have forgotten even having read it. And, you know, for Feast of Vultures, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: earlier in an interview elsewhere that you had some 1500 documents or 15,000 documents, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you got for that. So what are the kind of knowledge management systems you used to use?
[Amit Varma]: And what do you do now in terms of putting your research together, putting your thoughts together?
[Amit Varma]: How has that workflow evolved in a sense? So I've always been fond of documents.
[Guest]: So I used to store a lot of documents, but ever since digitization happened, you will see
[Guest]: hard disk lying around here and there, which I keep updating my computers. I got
[Guest]: Google, iCloud backups, etc. So the standard, the same. I email myself a lot of things.
[Guest]: I do keep notebooks. And for various things, because, as you said, you know, like, for example,
[Guest]: this notebook is about what I should do. This notebook is about some stories I'm working on.
[Guest]: There is a book in my bag, which is when I take notes for meetings. So not, it's not perfect.
[Guest]: And it keeps changing. So sometimes I start my day making notes about what to be done today and
[Guest]: start psyching off. Sometimes I don't do it. That's one part of managing my thought process.
[Guest]: The second, and which is, I think, what has really worked for me in terms of output, is my time
[Guest]: management, where it also flows into what you said about knowledge management, which is that in the
[Guest]: morning, I get up by 6.15, I'm up. And I'm very disciplined in that sense. Till about nine o'clock,
[Guest]: I don't like anyone disturbing, I don't pick up my phone. And I'm not really bothered by
[Guest]: it. That's when I actually sit in front of my laptop. I'm reading or writing, either reading
[Guest]: something for the book I'm writing or I'm typing my book. Nothing else. I do nothing else. I might
[Guest]: look at the Guardian, Indian Express and New York Times to let you know what's happening around.
[Guest]: I don't even look at Twitter or anything because that helps me to. So every morning when I'm,
[Guest]: when I'm, when I start my day, I'm very sorted in my mind about what I'm looking for, what I'm
[Guest]: reading. And if I don't find something, I mail my colleagues, etc. The other thing is, I organize
[Guest]: my backend because a lot of the stories that I'm pursuing are in gestation for years.
[Guest]: Because as soon as I get it organized, I put a folder name and it goes in there. But I have a
[Guest]: fairly good sense of, so if you, if I want to know about, let's say something, let's call it
[Guest]: 2G scam. I can pull it out quickly. I just need to research. I know the keywords. So it's stored
[Guest]: here and there. I got some backups. Now it's all on cloud and all that. That's how I manage. I
[Guest]: don't, there is no other rocket science beyond it. As far as books are concerned, one bad thing
[Guest]: is that I do, I find it, I struggle to recall names of even writers, but some books which
[Guest]: are stuck with me or which really impressed me, those I can recall, not to the page, but I would
[Guest]: know where is that reference in which chapter. That's a practice. You know how we all, there are
[Guest]: certain books that remains with you. The third thing is that I also tend to speed read because
[Guest]: if one doesn't have the time and the luxury to read everything, like these days I'm reading
[Guest]: transfer of power papers, massive volumes, right? But I speed read. I know I'm looking for a so and
[Guest]: so date and then I spend time there. So it's each one of us develop our own strategies. I'm sure you
[Guest]: have, I can see the way you have kept book behind you and the way I have arranged book behind you
[Guest]: are very different. And it might also tell about the reading habits of others. Beyond that, I do
[Guest]: take some security precautions. So I don't just save my passwords anywhere and everywhere anymore.
[Guest]: I just ensure some encryption, et cetera, et cetera. I've just moved into a new house. So what
[Amit Varma]: you're seeing besides me is a bunch of unopened cartons with some books piled on top of them,
[Amit Varma]: but that's not how I keep my books. I also have bookshelves like you do, but I also have
[Amit Varma]: a massive amount of mess normally, but not the kind that you're looking at right now. So you
[Amit Varma]: spoke about sort of books that have tended to stay with you. My next question before we take a break
[Amit Varma]: and go on to then talk about your latest book is what are the kind of sort of nonfiction books or
[Amit Varma]: writers that you've admired or learned from given the kind of stuff that you are writing? Like your
[Amit Varma]: books have been these investigative books of nonfiction, but also they feature very fine
[Amit Varma]: storytelling use of novelistic techniques. So what are the kind of books that you admired when
[Amit Varma]: you read them and you took as models and are there writers who influenced you where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you looked at a particular writer and you said, yeah, yeah, that's the kind of work I want to do.
[Guest]: Since the last 20, 30 years, as you know, nonfiction writing has really boomed and scaled
[Guest]: up qualitatively. But even then a book like this, it's called the Bear Trap, Afghanistan's Untold
[Guest]: Story. This was written by a former ISI colonel and Mark Atkin in the 80s. I mean, this is courage.
[Guest]: They're detailing how ISI ran the Afghan operations. So to me, this is also an inspirational
[Guest]: book to what people like James Wright, Twin Towers, etc. write. So there are all of them,
[Guest]: but I don't, I don't, I don't, I'm not the kind who has an inspirational figure or someone I look
[Guest]: up to. But yeah, when I was writing my first book, A Feast of Vultures, my prologue is set in a
[Guest]: village in Bihar and they're struggling to get road and hospital, etc. Some people have noticed
[Guest]: that I've tried to use some of the magical realism techniques that Marques popularized in that. So I
[Guest]: love the way, you know, when Marques, Marques will never tell you, I'm going to tell you magic.
[Guest]: You'll just tell the magic, right? So little, little things like that. But, you know, I grew
[Guest]: up on Aldous Huxley and George Orwell and all that. So you'll find a lot of my sentences are
[Guest]: very pithy. I don't know if you'll find it, some wicked sense of humor you'll find here and there.
[Guest]: So all that is inspired from those writers. Because if you, if you recall those, the Orwellian
[Guest]: English or the Huxley's writing and all that is very matter of fact to the world. So because
[Guest]: that shaped my thinking from very early days as a student, that I as a writer, I have a
[Guest]: responsibility towards you, which is you as a reader, which is to ensure that you are not forced
[Guest]: to take a dictionary in your hand while you read me. The reading has to be an activity between you
[Guest]: and me and my pages, not between you, a dictionary or a Google and me, and then the game is over.
[Guest]: So find the appropriate words, but not the difficult words is a big, big challenge for me,
[Guest]: because I'm very insecure and unsure of my language skills, even today. So I read, I sometimes
[Guest]: write, rewrite sentences, but yes, you will never find unusually long draft sentences,
[Guest]: you will not find unwieldy adjectives and adverbs in my writings. So those have been shaped by,
[Guest]: you know, I told you when I was in the signing school, I had this great English teacher called
[Guest]: Prem C. Nair, who came from Oxford, British educator. People like him taught us, there was another
[Guest]: teacher called N. Balasundar Nair. These people, because I come from Malayalam mediums, I learned
[Guest]: English from them. And one of the things that I learned was to use bare minimum words to tell
[Guest]: something. And I think that's the greatest way to connect with the reader. So, and it's a very
[Guest]: deliberate thing I do, because there was a time if you read what I used to write early in my 20s,
[Guest]: and I used to write with this flurry language, like a lot of mallus, and you will never figure
[Guest]: out what they're writing, you know, take names, but even if I repeat some sentence, you'll figure
[Guest]: out who I'm talking about. There are many of them like that. Yeah, so I have been very conscious,
[Amit Varma]: if I can cut out an adjective, I would. This is brilliant. And you mentioned Orwell,
[Amit Varma]: and obviously Orwell in terms of prose is my absolute hero. But it's interesting that you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned Orwell, because while reading your book, and by the way, I can't believe that you have
[Amit Varma]: doubts about your own language, like you just said, because it's such a bloody well written
[Amit Varma]: book. But while reading your book, I was reminded of this quote that I keep sharing with my writing
[Amit Varma]: class, which is, you know, Orwell's quote, good prose is like a windowpane, where his whole point
[Amit Varma]: was that prose like a windowpane is a means to an end, you know, a windowpane is supposed to show
[Amit Varma]: you what's on the other side, and the prose should be equally invisible, you don't notice it at all,
[Amit Varma]: you just go with it, where it is going. The other point that also struck me just now is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when you speak of coming from a Mallu medium school, and then learning English and all and
[Amit Varma]: I wonder if in some ways that might be an advantage, because what that forces you to do
[Amit Varma]: is to pay deeper attention in a more granular way to the intricacies of language to the words that
[Amit Varma]: you choose to the way that you use grammar, like, you know, I remember one of my writing students
[Amit Varma]: for the online course I teach once asked me about how you know, her first language was in English,
[Amit Varma]: and you know, how does one do it? Should one write in English? And I pointed her to this
[Amit Varma]: great interview of Jhumpa Lahiri in Tyler Cowen's podcast conversations with Tyler,
[Amit Varma]: and Jhumpa of course, learned Italian and has just written a book in Italian.
[Amit Varma]: And through what Jhumpa said in that interview, I discovered this incredible
[Amit Varma]: writer I recommend to all my listeners, called Agatha Christophe, I think Hungarian,
[Amit Varma]: but moved to France when she was 21, learned French from scratch, and wrote this incredible
[Amit Varma]: series of books called the Notebook Trilogy. The language there is incredible. It's very spare,
[Amit Varma]: very sparse, very powerful, you know, and I'm reading her in translation, of course,
[Amit Varma]: but you still get a sense of what it is. So do you feel that that also made a difference perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: in your early attempts to be more florid than one would otherwise be because you might also
[Amit Varma]: be trying to convince yourself that hey, I can do this language. And you know, does that change
[Guest]: later? No, no, you're so right, you know, because I think, when I started writing English,
[Guest]: I was writing to impress others, and impress myself, not impress myself to give myself
[Guest]: confidence. But I was writing absolute trash. But as I progressed, and my own sense of language
[Guest]: moved from being the curtain to the windowpane that you're talking about, right? I wanted to be
[Guest]: that. And that's where I dropped this entire, so my own writing has changed. And in fact,
[Guest]: my agent Kanishka that they were telling me that probably, the Silent Coup is a far faster paced
[Guest]: pithy writing than even Feast of Vultures. Even Ajitha, my editor was telling me that.
[Guest]: It could well be true, because in the first book, I'm also making this entire effort to
[Guest]: explain everything to the audience. Because I'm also trying to explain to myself,
[Guest]: you know what I'm saying? When a writer is writing something, he's writing it for the reader,
[Guest]: and also for himself. But with the new book, I am more confident, I know my audience, because
[Guest]: I give them more respect, and I give myself more respect. So it's a process. So I think
[Guest]: language keeps changing. My writing in the next book might be something else. But probably,
[Guest]: as you said, I was, I grew up in Malayalam. And then I shifted to English. And now I think I even
[Guest]: think in English. Now I not struggle, I find it very difficult to communicate complex ideas in
[Guest]: Malayalam to people. Whereas I'm very comfortable talking Malayalam with my parents, my siblings.
[Guest]: But even when I think in English and write in English, I think at somewhere in the back of
[Guest]: your mind, your sense of language is so rooted in your native sensibilities. I'll tell you,
[Guest]: for example, something that MS Madhavan recently pointed out, which struck me very big time,
[Guest]: was that rain is so much part of the Malayali life. But rain doesn't have too many adjectives
[Guest]: in Malayalam. There's only one or two words for Malayalam. There are very few words about rain,
[Guest]: because it's so part of us. So if you look at my book, I think if you break down the book,
[Guest]: my book, it may be just a few thousand words, meaning I'm repeating a few thousand words,
[Guest]: nothing more. I'm not, I will not introduce an adjective that I know there. I will not.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, it's a very, very interesting conversation. I'm not, I'm not such a literary
[Guest]: accomplished guy, but I think language for me is the means to tell a story. And I'm telling
[Guest]: you a story or many stories because I have an argument to make. So it goes to that way.
[Guest]: And I have an argument to make because it's an argument that I think everyone around me should,
[Guest]: or my readers should know the way I know. So he's able to look at the democracy, the society,
[Guest]: with the same lens and comfort that I have. So when a leader makes a promise for a certain
[Guest]: statement, I can see through what Prem said, that I'm a very typical beat reporter. So when in beat
[Guest]: reporting, we say that, have you cracked the beat or not? Crack meaning, then you are so comfortable,
[Guest]: you can predict what's going to happen in the beat. So I can tell you in military, if I see
[Guest]: something, I can tell you, okay, there's a war going to happen or not. That much confidence I
[Guest]: have, seeing elements around. So I think it's about cracking that apart to helping the reader
[Guest]: crack the beat called India or beat called democracy.
[Amit Varma]: So a final question before we go in for the break, and then we come back to discuss the book.
[Amit Varma]: And this is again, from an interesting anecdote that in fact, Prem shared in a workshop that he
[Amit Varma]: did for our writing class, which is by the way on YouTube, and I'll share the link in the show notes
[Amit Varma]: where Prem pointed to this interview of a writer, I forget if he mentioned the name, but if he did,
[Amit Varma]: I don't remember it. But this interview of a writer who was asked about his writing process,
[Amit Varma]: and he said, first I go into a room, and I sit down, you know, with my computer or typewriter or
[Amit Varma]: whatever. And then I shut the door. But I'm not alone. Because, you know, I can sense behind me
[Amit Varma]: all the people who have expectations of me or who are looking over my shoulder in different ways,
[Amit Varma]: or who I care about. And also I just sit there quietly till all of them leave.
[Amit Varma]: So whoever was asking the question, then asked him, so so that's when you begin writing.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, No, that's not when I begin writing either, because there is still one person in the
[Amit Varma]: room, and that's me. And I wait till I leave. And then I let the story tell itself. So and I was
[Amit Varma]: very struck by this. And is this something that you have thought about in your work or tried to
[Amit Varma]: do? Because earlier, you spoke about how a reporter should never be the hero of a story.
[Amit Varma]: Also, in terms of language, in our youth, we all write that kind of florid style, right,
[Amit Varma]: when we're trying to be impressive, and which is obviously putting ourselves front and center
[Amit Varma]: and saying, Look at me, how will I write, but then eventually you learn to kind of take that out and
[Amit Varma]: just do justice to the story and to let it speak for itself. So tell me about your thoughts on this.
[Guest]: So I said, I write in the morning, but, you know, like, after nine, I go for my walk.
[Guest]: When I'm walking, I'm usually thinking about what should come next. And that process goes on
[Guest]: through the day while I'm driving. And very often when I'm sitting in meetings with people,
[Guest]: they do notice that I get bored very quickly and my attention goes away. One of the reasons is that
[Guest]: I'm still thinking processing, how should I now structure the next two paragraphs.
[Guest]: So that is something which constantly happens with me. And people have to slap me out even
[Guest]: at home also. Sometimes my wife or daughter do get surprised that I'm sitting in front of TV
[Guest]: and just watching. It's not that I'm lost in the TV, I'm thinking about the sentence,
[Guest]: how should I introduce this character? How should I come in? I as a, you know, meaning the little
[Guest]: David, how should he come into the story about explaining how often should I? So that process is
[Guest]: to me, it's 24 hours. It's almost anxiety inducing to me. And I'm anxious. I suffer from anxiety.
[Guest]: So I get very anxious about, you know, how much should I come in? So last, when I wrote my first
[Guest]: book, my editors pushed me to come in more into the book because I was so heavy. I was skipping
[Guest]: away like a traditional reporter. So when I get into the room in the morning with a cup of tea
[Guest]: and sit in front of my laptop, then my previous 24 hours of processing that has happened,
[Guest]: just flows. And there is an end to it. Because sometimes I have only thought about a paragraph.
[Guest]: So this morning I was writing something about formation of Indian democracy. And I've been
[Guest]: writing about that one incident over the last four weeks. And I've been getting so irritated
[Guest]: with myself, but I am unable to pull myself away from reading transfer of power papers regarding
[Guest]: those days. So it happens, it happens, but because it's lingering on and you know that there's a
[Guest]: great seed out there. How do you now write it? Right? So when I sit in front of the computer
[Guest]: in the morning, I am not bothered about anybody. I am just writing what I've been processing for
[Guest]: the last previous 24 hours. But there is one more thing which makes my writing, which made
[Guest]: it possible for me to write two books in the last five years. One is that I am, I think,
[Guest]: I believe that I'm a multitasker. I can do multiple things. And a lot of people find it
[Guest]: overwhelming, including my family and many friends. I mean, my mind keeps racing about
[Guest]: ideas and things and people. So while I'm writing the book, I was also doing a startup.
[Guest]: While I was writing this book and doing the startup, I was also helping people structure
[Guest]: some film stories or documentary structures. While I was doing all these things, I was also
[Guest]: fundraising. While I was doing all this, I'm also mentoring reporters on university. So I'm
[Guest]: genuinely a multitasker. And maybe I become a machine in that sense. So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That's very impressive. Because not only am I not a multitasker myself, like I sometimes find
[Amit Varma]: it hard even to be a single tasker, and just to kind of focus on one thing. And one of the
[Amit Varma]: kind of problems that I've also had is self absorption, where like you pointed out, you're
[Amit Varma]: sitting in front of the TV and your mind is somewhere else. So you're sitting with someone,
[Amit Varma]: but you're not in the moment, your mind is somewhere else doing something, which is something
[Amit Varma]: obviously one feels guilty about if you're with loved ones, because, you know, then that becomes
[Amit Varma]: a problem. Are you treating them as a means to an end? Are you not there in the moment there
[Amit Varma]: for them, your mind is somewhere else. That's a complicated sort of trade off. Is that something
[Amit Varma]: you've thought about? What does one do about this?
[Guest]: Of course, you know, it's family is very close knit. My wife, daughter, my parents, siblings,
[Guest]: all of them. But there are weeks and months when I have to make an effort to make the phone call.
[Guest]: Meaning the old parents are back in village and we talk almost every other day. But there are
[Guest]: weeks when I have to force myself to call them. Not that I don't love them any less, not that
[Guest]: there is any friction. But what you said, you know, you're so caught up in your mind is racing
[Guest]: on something that even a phone call to your loved ones is a distraction. So there are days when I
[Guest]: come into my house, go to the bathroom, take bath, come back, and they're just wondering what is he
[Guest]: up to. So it's a problem. But then I think all of us do have our own peculiarities that get
[Guest]: accentuated as we grow older and then we get more irritated and irritating. So I am sure I'm one of
[Guest]: them. But yeah, you can't help it, you know, because I used to think that this is a boarding
[Guest]: school problem because you are emotionally plugged away from your family at the age of 11, 12.
[Guest]: And that may be the gap. But yeah, what you're saying, I understand. So I do have to make an
[Guest]: effort very often. You know, I tell myself, call your wife, call Priya. Don't keep driving for an
[Guest]: hour without calling her. Yeah, it's an effort. It's an effort sometimes. Yeah, and definitely
[Amit Varma]: not a boarding school problem because I didn't go to one. So anyway, we'll take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break here. And when we come back, we'll talk about a book which I can't wait to do. What a book.
[Amit Varma]: On the seen and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games. Well, if you want to be
[Amit Varma]: surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win win proposition for you. Head on over
[Amit Varma]: to Indiancolors.com. Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary
[Amit Varma]: artists in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches and home
[Amit Varma]: decor items. You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices.
[Amit Varma]: And artists get royalties for every product you buy. Win win game. The Indian Colors new ranges
[Amit Varma]: in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women and casual shirts for men with standout
[Amit Varma]: motifs by artists such as Tanmay Samanta, Manisha Gherabaswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra and
[Amit Varma]: Jaideep Mehrotra. Stay home, but dress smart. And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown
[Amit Varma]: days, worry not. You can show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian
[Amit Varma]: Colors. Corporate gifting is also available. So head on over to Indiancolors.com. That's
[Amit Varma]: colors with an OU and make art a part of your life. And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code
[Amit Varma]: unseen. That's right. Unseen for 15% off at Indiancolors.com. Welcome back to the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen. I'm chatting with Josie Joseph about his wonderful book, The Silent Coup, a history of
[Amit Varma]: India's deep state. You know, you structured the book really interestingly in terms of storytelling
[Amit Varma]: where you humanize it with this character you meet early in the story in your first section in
[Amit Varma]: Bombay. But I'll take more of an approach of coming at the issue from root causes. You know,
[Amit Varma]: before we even start talking about our security establishment, I found three particular strands
[Amit Varma]: in your book, very fascinating. And one of them is the 1857 mutiny and the 1861 Indian Police Act
[Amit Varma]: that it leads to and why we still kind of feel the after effects of that. So tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about that. Because not many people think that our current problems go that far back. But
[Amit Varma]: of course they do. So tell me a bit more about why the mutiny was so formative in having the
[Guest]: kind of police force that we do now. Post-mutiny, as you know, the empire decides to take complete
[Guest]: control. And one of the big steps they do is to bring in this police act and give the framework
[Guest]: for a police force to run the country on behalf of the empire and to control the locals, the
[Guest]: revolting locals and put them in their place. And that police act has remained the framework
[Guest]: for most police acts after that, even those that have been passed after independence.
[Guest]: And that remains an overarching umbrella that governs Indian police forces even today.
[Guest]: For the last two, two and a half decades, and mind you, starting from the post-independence
[Guest]: period, there have been administrative reforms commissions, there have been police commissions
[Guest]: and others who have recommended reforms to the police act. They have all been scuttled.
[Guest]: And two decades ago, Prakash Singh and others, former IPS officer landed in Supreme Court
[Guest]: demanding police reforms and Supreme Court has passed landmark judgments, but they are all on
[Guest]: paper. None of it seems to have worked. In nutshell, the police reforms is basically
[Guest]: to depoliticise the police, which involves simple steps like at TANA level, there will be,
[Guest]: or district level also, there will be a committee of nominated citizens, prominent personalities
[Guest]: ensured to be, it is apolitical or with political representatives from all sides to look at the
[Guest]: performance of the TANA, which is what a democracy should let do, look at their investigations or
[Guest]: their operations. At the state level to give the police chief a fixed tenure so that he
[Guest]: knows that whatever he does, he will, he cannot be shaken for two years by the political masters,
[Guest]: which means he is not trying to please the masters. There are all these recommendations
[Guest]: that are out there. Not one Indian state has fully implemented it because our politicians
[Guest]: do not like the police to be apolitical. Because the moment they lose control of the police,
[Guest]: their thuggery, their criminal political bent of mind cannot exist. Many of them could land up in
[Guest]: jail. So, they have been, it is a political class with the active support of some part of bureaucracy
[Guest]: and a lot of silence by judiciary that has helped the remnants of the First War of Independence
[Guest]: and the Police Act of 1861 to remain today, which in very simple one sentence, the police
[Guest]: is not of the people, police is the agent of the state and the state is empire or the politician
[Guest]: and the people are potential enemies. Into that mix, add the deadly poison called corruption.
[Guest]: So, the politician on top is corrupt or his party is corrupt because he needs a lot of money.
[Guest]: Now, he uses this police force and other arms of the state to collect money at various levels.
[Guest]: So, he helps legitimize daily corruption. So, the police constable on ground who is asking
[Guest]: for a bribe knows that he will be protected by some politician at some level because he is also
[Guest]: helping that politician make money somewhere else, collect some hafta somewhere. Between these two,
[Guest]: we have a deadly nuclear bomb attack on the masses. Yeah, and you've detailed in your book
[Amit Varma]: about how this group of people went to the Supreme Court in 1996, ex-IPS officers said,
[Amit Varma]: let's get this changed. 2006, the Supreme Court rules that, hey, this is what the states need to
[Amit Varma]: do and no one's run it to date. And why would they? I mean, why would any class of politicians
[Amit Varma]: give up so much power? What is also kind of interesting and we almost take this for granted,
[Amit Varma]: but I think it needs to be pointed out how much structurally the police here is really serving
[Amit Varma]: the political class and not so much the people and it's supposed to serve the people. And this
[Amit Varma]: notion of the police was something we carried over from colonial times. Like I remember during the
[Amit Varma]: Constituent Assembly debates, there was one legislator who complained about how the constitution
[Amit Varma]: is being written from the point of view of a policeman, which is, you know, and we kept most
[Amit Varma]: of the Indian Penal Code, the IPC, which was, you know, intended to kind of subjugate the ruled,
[Amit Varma]: as it were. And I think those words would still hold this way today. And an interesting thing that
[Amit Varma]: not many people realize, you know, we complain about, for example, the sedition law, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, why do we need that after the British left? Well, the Supreme Court struck it down in
[Amit Varma]: 1950 and Nehru brought it back with the First Amendment in a process that's detailed in
[Amit Varma]: Rupardaman Singh's excellent 16 Stormy Days, which I had an episode with Rupardaman also,
[Guest]: which I'll link from the show notes. So those days, the sedition, the limits of freedom of
[Guest]: expression was triggered by the fear of the communist. Today, it is being triggered by the
[Guest]: fear of the Muslim terrorists, or the Islamic terror conspiracies, right, and urban Naxals.
[Guest]: So the enemies keep changing, enemy of the state, the so called enemies keep changing.
[Guest]: But the tools against them remain the same.
[Amit Varma]: The tools remain the same. The second factor out of the three, which I want to talk about,
[Amit Varma]: which struck me as contributing to the security establishment being the way it is here,
[Amit Varma]: is that interesting phase, post-independence, where you have this security apparatus,
[Amit Varma]: which is taken over from the colonial rules, but where it's different from other countries freed
[Amit Varma]: from colonialism, is that our political rulers in their wisdom realized that the military was
[Amit Varma]: a danger, that there were coups happening all over the place in other newly independent countries.
[Amit Varma]: We've seen on Pakistan how big a hand the military plays. So therefore, that kind of decision was
[Amit Varma]: made that keep the military under control. And therefore, the parts of the security establishment,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll ask you to go into detail soon. But before that, the just this kind of general phase,
[Amit Varma]: the parts of the security establishment, which are dominant are, you know, the police and all
[Amit Varma]: the intelligence agencies we have, and all of those and not the military per se. And there,
[Amit Varma]: of course, it's a vicious circle. But tell me a little bit about how important this decision was,
[Amit Varma]: and could there have been a little more foresight in seeing the way the things played out with the
[Amit Varma]: rest of the security establishment as you detail in your book? Or is it not fair to expect that
[Amit Varma]: of the people back in the day? I mean, how would they know that it would turn out like this?
[Guest]: I think, see, the generation of Nehru, Ambedkar, Patel, Assad, that generation truly believed in
[Guest]: parliamentary democracy. But they were creating the world's largest democracy. There were a
[Guest]: million problems to deal with. And as old democracies, it is a process, it was a process.
[Guest]: So we can't blame them for not doing it. They did some of the cornerstone moves like,
[Guest]: I don't know if you go to UPSC office, you will see a photograph, Nehru is visiting UPSC to call
[Guest]: on the UPSC chairman. That's the respect that Nehru, the Prime Minister gave UPSC, which is
[Guest]: recruiting civil servants. Like Chief Election Commissioner is autonomy, discussions of which
[Guest]: begins very early. I'm saying that the democratic state did bring in like, for example, the way it
[Guest]: structured the Ministry of Defence, Army, Air Force, Navy, and Coast Guard, they became the
[Guest]: adjunct offices. They were not inside the ministry. Ministry was fully civilian. And even today, I
[Guest]: don't know if you know this, the Defence Secretary has to approve the budget of the military
[Guest]: intelligence. So the controls are very strong, sometimes absurd also. Sometimes they go overboard
[Guest]: with the babus, trying to decide everything that should be done in Siachen or you know,
[Guest]: but controls are very strong. While the other part of the non-military security establishment,
[Guest]: which largely came over from the British era, especially the Intelligence Bureau and later
[Guest]: R&DW, also, I think, to a great extent, Indira Gandhi's autocratic base or whatever you want
[Guest]: to call it, they did not put them under proper parliamentary accountability. One of the arguments
[Guest]: given by many of the intelligence operatives even today is that, oh, no, no, our politicians are
[Guest]: correct, we can't trust them. Maybe they're correct, but ultimately, they're people's
[Guest]: representatives. But there are countries where even if the intelligence agencies are not under
[Guest]: parliamentary audit, there are some kind of factional audit, checks and balances. For example,
[Guest]: the entire industry of sources. So all agencies are dependent upon information and information
[Guest]: comes from sources or technical intelligence. And this source industry is massive, much,
[Guest]: much bigger than any industry that we know. But if a CIA or MI6, if they get information from a
[Guest]: source X, and that source X is misleading, they have systems in place to audit who is X and what
[Guest]: information they gave, was it misleading, then cut him off. But in India, you don't have any
[Guest]: verifiable auditing mechanisms. So the fake information industry, which in turn,
[Guest]: can help these agencies or arms of them to create fake narratives, etc., got strengthened over the
[Guest]: years. And as the parliamentary accountability deteriorated, and parliamentary debates
[Guest]: deteriorated, and parliament as an institution deteriorated, which right under Mr. Narendra
[Guest]: Modi is in the worst phase. And I think the government is almost inimical towards parliament
[Guest]: today. Those accountabilities have been weakening. And on the parallelly, the sinister arms,
[Guest]: the unknown arms of these agencies were strengthening. Because their strength is
[Guest]: not just from their lack of accountability. Their strength is also from the fact that
[Guest]: they are the tools for the political masters to create their narratives, to intimidate their
[Guest]: rivals, to silence the media, to silence critics. So they draw power from two sides. One,
[Guest]: that they naturally are not accountable at any reasonable rate. Second, they are the tools of
[Guest]: the political executive for creating the narratives and terrorizing the masses.
[Guest]: So we can't say that Nehru or Patel or Assad, they were not foresighted. It is that the state
[Guest]: formation is a long process. Democracies take decades to mature. And democracies collapse in
[Guest]: decades. We have seen both. And we are standing at a point where, you and me today sitting here,
[Guest]: I don't know how much of optimism we share about democracy's future in India. I am hopeful,
[Guest]: but I don't see any reason to be optimistic that we would be a mature liberal democracy anytime
[Guest]: soon. And for that, the reason is that the process of democratization of India, it doesn't happen
[Guest]: like climbing a peak. In India, it is always, there have been governments during which it has
[Guest]: really gone up. For example, the first Manmohan Singh government, the way right to information,
[Guest]: right to education, etc. came in, it was quite impressive and revolutionary. But by the second
[Guest]: Manmohan Singh government, you have corruption, all the mismanagement. So it has always been in
[Guest]: ebbs and flows. But the fact is that we gave up that process somewhere, strategic process of
[Guest]: bringing agencies accountable to minimize sinister sides to a democracy, to polish the edges of the
[Guest]: rough edges of democratic institutions. And that's where our problems are stuck. It is not impossible
[Guest]: to reform and rewind. It's not impossible to move forward. But today, we are in a very vicious cycle
[Guest]: where a generation of politicians, both in power and outside have mostly been beneficiaries,
[Guest]: and have actively used these arms of the security forces to create their images and narrative and
[Amit Varma]: even gaps of power. To give you my view on, you know, you just said, I wonder how we feel about
[Amit Varma]: liberal democracy. I'm pessimistic in the short term, pessimistic in the medium term. I'm
[Amit Varma]: optimistic in the long term. But in the long term, we are all dead, as Keen said. So who knows. And
[Amit Varma]: I'm also reminded by what you're saying. And I kind of agree with you that this kind of stuff
[Amit Varma]: would have been impossible to foresee at the founding of the nation. And I had an episode
[Amit Varma]: with the historian Gyan Prakash, who's written this very fine book on the emergency. And his
[Amit Varma]: central argument there is that, you know, everything that Indira Gandhi did was really
[Amit Varma]: constitutional. And why was it constitutional in the first place? Why was it legit to do it?
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, which has the same answer as to why did we design the state for a policeman?
[Amit Varma]: And what Gyan's thesis was that look, when the framers of our constitution was sitting in a room
[Amit Varma]: in Delhi, framing the constitution, the country was falling apart, there was violence all over,
[Amit Varma]: no one knew if the center would hold. So from their point of view, it is rational to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: follow the same impulse of the colonialists, make sure it all stays together and doesn't kind of
[Amit Varma]: fragment and all of that. My third question, which is not something that you've spoken about
[Amit Varma]: in the book explicitly per se, but that strikes me as a big contributing factor to as one of the
[Amit Varma]: manifestations of the decay in the security establishment, not a core part of it per se,
[Amit Varma]: but a manifestation, a new enemy and also an old enemy is this whole Hindu Muslim thing.
[Amit Varma]: More and more as I have gone through life, I realized that I kind of grew up in this kind of
[Amit Varma]: clustered elite existence where one assumed that people were generally secular, and that religion
[Amit Varma]: generally didn't matter. And then over a period of time, you sort of realize that it does. You
[Amit Varma]: know, one thesis I have long held is that our constitution doesn't reflect who we are as a
[Amit Varma]: people. And this is almost again, a cliche on the show, because I keep chatting about this with
[Amit Varma]: especially constitutional experts. But the point there is that look, our constitution is not as
[Amit Varma]: liberal as you and I would perhaps like it to be, but it is still more liberal than society,
[Amit Varma]: which leads us to the question of was it merely a topsoil as Ambedkar so eloquently said,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore, did we make a mistake in assuming that, you know, we could make the country liberal
[Amit Varma]: in a top down kind of way, which itself seems a little illiberal. And did we fail at those who
[Amit Varma]: are liberal among us, though many people interpret the word liberal differently, but on this, I think
[Amit Varma]: they would all be agreed, did we fail among us in some way to make India more liberal, because it
[Amit Varma]: now seems that, you know, politics has finally caught up with society that we were like, like
[Amit Varma]: this all along. I did an episode with Akshay Mukul also on his great book in the Gita Press. And
[Amit Varma]: one of the things that I learned while reading that book and looking at his work is that this
[Amit Varma]: has been a country where these divisions are much deeper than we realize and much more widespread.
[Amit Varma]: And this is represented in, for example, in some of the stats that you've given in your book,
[Amit Varma]: like early on, you speak about the under representation of Muslims where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you speak about, and I'll quote you, less than 1% of Muslims made up the ranks of the Maharashtra
[Amit Varma]: State Police, far below India's embarrassingly low 4% Muslim representation in the IPS.
[Amit Varma]: The story was not very different in other states in Uttar Pradesh, 2.3%,
[Amit Varma]: little over 3% head constables, just over 4% constables. And also just over 3% of the paramilitary
[Amit Varma]: force was Muslim, only 3% of the IAS was Muslim, and so on. And at one level, one could say that
[Amit Varma]: it's because Muslims tend to be from a lower socioeconomic class, so less opportunities and
[Amit Varma]: all of that, but that can't possibly explain this massive disparity. The other thing that is very
[Amit Varma]: clear in your book, time and again, is that constantly the security establishment is building
[Amit Varma]: narratives of Islamic terror when none exist, creating fake news, implicating innocent people,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. So is this a tendency that you have noticed that goes beyond all of
[Amit Varma]: this? Okay, we understand that the security establishment is a tool of the political class,
[Amit Varma]: and they have their own aims and all of that. But is there also this overarching anti-Muslimness,
[Amit Varma]: which has been expressing itself in our governance in these ways, long before our
[Guest]: politics got there? Yeah, there are a few things to consider together. One is that for the last
[Guest]: three decades, what has been most of our security establishment doing? Fighting in Kashmir,
[Guest]: or operating there. And what is Kashmir? While it may be militancy for Kashmir's freedom,
[Guest]: whatever, it's mostly an Islamic militancy. That has really got into the nerves and DNA
[Guest]: of our organizations. That has created such anti-Islamic bias, that it's going to take a
[Guest]: long time to wipe away. Second, because agencies are not accountable, nobody's bothered to inspect
[Guest]: these biases. Third is that if your bias and the resultant action do not attract any punishment,
[Guest]: or any other pushback, you'll keep at it, because that's the safest thing to do. That's what most of
[Guest]: the agency people have been doing. And because of all this, our agencies have always been
[Guest]: very hostile towards Muslims. I should use the word hostile, because R&DW at the senior level
[Guest]: doesn't appoint a single Muslim, after all these years. And IB has Muslims, but there have been so
[Guest]: many whispers about the kind of anti-Muslim bias there. And the kind of fake information IB and
[Guest]: other agencies actively spread in the last decade, when I say last decade, the first decade of the
[Guest]: century, when two terror groups were bombing our cities, one was Indian Mujahideen, the other was
[Guest]: a Hindu terror group. When both were bombing us, especially IB and police, they were spreading
[Guest]: fake narratives and creating fake terrorists. So, I've had this couple of personal, very bizarre
[Guest]: experience. So, Malegaon, first bomb blast happened. My own sources in the agencies told me,
[Guest]: look, there have been Hindutva, terrorists, violence forces in that area, don't ignore it.
[Guest]: So, I wrote an analysis. Next day, I am summoned, I'm called in by one of the senior most officers
[Guest]: in IB, who lectures me about how two different Muslim groups are fighting in Malegaon. And one
[Guest]: is Wahhabis. I think Sunnis versus Deobandis. So, I'm saying they are actively creating a
[Guest]: narrative, which made me much later suspicious. If are they, were they trying to cover up
[Guest]: the fact that there is a Hindutva group existing, because later on I've heard very serious senior
[Guest]: people saying that there may have been some kind of a state involvement in creating the
[Guest]: terrorist group. And if you look at Colonel Perot's testimonies, etc., there are hints out
[Guest]: there. So, what I'm saying is that the anti-Muslim bias that really peaked because of Kashmir,
[Guest]: within the ranks, have been further strengthened by actions within the organizations of not
[Guest]: actively recruiting enough Muslims, not bringing Muslims to leadership positions,
[Guest]: not that there were not Muslims available, etc. And third, the lack of accountability. So,
[Guest]: those intelligence operatives, those policemen who created the fake narratives, who created
[Guest]: fake terrorists, all of them have gotten away without any punishment. Some of your most
[Guest]: celebrated IPS officers have been crass anti-Muslim communal people in their ranks.
[Guest]: And that is what I captured in my book. I have tried to capture in my book.
[Guest]: Many of our police officers and policemen who have been honoured by the president and the
[Guest]: states year after year are mere, brutal, daylight murderers. So, there is no accountability,
[Guest]: they are not held accountable. You don't see very many policemen, there are some exceptions
[Guest]: in Manipur, for example, 50 policemen are on trial for state-sponsored killings, but I don't
[Guest]: know what's happening to them. Other than that, look at Punjab, thousands disappeared. I mean,
[Guest]: you come in, KPS, Gill or others, whatever justifications you can give, but in a democracy,
[Guest]: even in the thickest fog of war, the police or the agencies are supposed to be upholding
[Guest]: the constitution of the country, which guarantees individual liberty to everyone,
[Guest]: including every Sardarji, every Punjabi in Punjab, every Manipuri, every Kashmiri.
[Guest]: So, somewhere we got completely messed up and because, see, without accountability,
[Guest]: no systems improve. So, you are speaking of emergency, how did Indira Gandhi and Kothari
[Guest]: manage to run this country for one and a half, two years under emergency? It is because they
[Guest]: had this non-security, non-military arm of the security establishment, especially the police,
[Guest]: income tax, etc., to terrorize people. And after that, what happened? Jagmohan, who was in Delhi,
[Guest]: leading many of the demolitions or actions of Delhi, what happened to him? He went on to become
[Guest]: a cabinet minister and twice the governor of Jammu and Kashmir. So, is the story of almost
[Guest]: every other bureaucrat who played the gunda role for the Indira Gandhi's emergency period. What
[Guest]: happened to policemen who did ridiculous things in Gujarat under Narendra Modi? They are all now
[Guest]: in powerful positions or have been given police medals and honors. So, we have a pattern which
[Guest]: encourages anti-Muslim biases and hostility towards minorities. And that is only going up
[Guest]: by the day because ever since our new government has come into power, they have been, I mean,
[Guest]: it is an embarrassing thing for you to hear a prime minister say that I can identify the
[Guest]: protesters by their clothes. I mean, forget the communal tone of it. Look at the, what is the
[Guest]: word, illiteracy of that language. Look at the stupidity of that language. So, we are in a crisis,
[Guest]: a crisis where anti-Muslim bias is both good politics and good for the rascals in the police
[Guest]: ranks or influence ranks. It's almost like a criminal collusion. Yeah, that's what it's come
[Amit Varma]: down to. And let's talk now about, you know, I want to go through each region one at a time,
[Amit Varma]: the way you've laid it out in your book is beautiful. And we'll probably start with
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir. I want to talk about Punjab, about Bombay, all of these. But first, I'd like you to
[Amit Varma]: define for my listeners what you mean by the security establishment, because one of the
[Amit Varma]: staggering sort of numbers in your book was when you point out that there are about 4 million
[Amit Varma]: members in the non-military security establishment distributed across the country, from, you know,
[Amit Varma]: state police to tax collectors, and so on. Let's define this. We don't mean the military by the
[Amit Varma]: non-military security establishment. What exactly does it mean? And how widespread is it?
[Guest]: So, non-military means you have the paramilitary forces, which increasingly play a lot of role in
[Guest]: domestic politics, militancy, etc. You have the state police forces, who are governed by the
[Guest]: legacy of the 1861 Police Act. You have a countrywide network of income tax
[Guest]: enforcement directorate. You have the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence. You have the Central
[Guest]: Bureau of Investigation. All of them have state nationwide presence. All of them are empowered
[Guest]: with bundles of laws, which are very, very efficient and can be easily misused if there
[Guest]: is no accountability. And all of these forces, so unless the state police force is under
[Guest]: an opposition party, otherwise it's available to the centre or the party in power.
[Guest]: Even in states where the opposition is ruling, even that opposition, the formula of misuse is
[Guest]: the same. So, you can't say that in Mamata Banerjee's West Bengal Police is very good. No,
[Guest]: because there also political power draws significantly from the misuse or the
[Guest]: leverage with the police. So, this 4 million approximate number that I had calculated,
[Guest]: 4 lakh people are spread across the country. They are empowered by various laws and they are
[Guest]: almost faceless. And whatever they do, very little of accountability. And they're assured
[Guest]: that they just need to obey the political masters of the day. In fact, their careers will boom. I
[Guest]: mean, it will flourish. They'll go to great heights in careers. That is non-military.
[Guest]: And why am I not stressing too much on the IAS is because yes, IAS also is part of the
[Guest]: political manipulation, but my focus was more on the security aspects of the state.
[Guest]: But add to it now the civil service, IAS. A large number of the IAS officers are available to the
[Guest]: political establishment. The good ones have gone quiet or left the service. So, we have a monster
[Guest]: out there. Most of it is not even visible to us. You can't put a shape to it. And you wouldn't
[Guest]: know that in your neighborhood sits an Income Tax Office or Enforcement Directorate. So,
[Guest]: it's almost invisible and they're present across the country and abroad. And they've got enormous
[Guest]: clout, power and laws. And that's the non-security establishment, what I call the non-military arm
[Amit Varma]: of the security establishment, if I may call it. Yeah, and all of them are used by politicians as
[Amit Varma]: by whoever is in power at that moment as a tools because that's just the structure of the whole
[Amit Varma]: thing. And you mentioned civil service, which brought to my mind, a thought I probably shouldn't
[Amit Varma]: share, but I'll share it anyway, that should an impolite IAS officer be considered part of the
[Amit Varma]: civil service. I had to get my one dad joke out of the way at this part of the episode. Let's talk
[Amit Varma]: about Kashmir now. And Kashmir seems to me an apt place to start because it's perhaps the starkest
[Amit Varma]: illustration of how the security establishment can grow and how it can create a kind of a vicious
[Amit Varma]: circle. Now, it's interesting you point out how you could see the security establishment in action
[Amit Varma]: as early as 1951, where you write about Sheikh Abdullah in the elections in that year, where you
[Amit Varma]: say, quote, Sheikh Abdullah was a seasoned politician quoted by two countries and stood
[Amit Varma]: astride the fault lines of nation making in South Asia. In October 51, when elections in the Kashmir
[Amit Varma]: Constituent Assembly were held, he ensured that the nomination papers of several leaders of Praja
[Amit Varma]: Parishad, a party of Jammu Hindus that was opposed to him, were rejected on mere technicalities.
[Amit Varma]: NC won all 75 seats. Abdullah went on to jail over 10,000 people on political charges. And in many
[Amit Varma]: instances, his detractors were expelled to Pakistan. In short, he manipulated the state machinery to
[Amit Varma]: meet his own political ambitions. Thinking back, it's not surprising that JNK, which has witnessed
[Amit Varma]: some of the worst tragedies of state machinations, should have been one of the first Indian states
[Amit Varma]: where the political and permanent executive manipulated the security apparatus. Now, this is,
[Amit Varma]: of course, pretty standard. But where we see the underpinnings of the crisis that is sort of still
[Amit Varma]: going on is when you talk about the 60s and what's happening there, and how what you so eloquently
[Amit Varma]: call the business of militancy begins to sort of take shape. And tell me a little bit more about
[Amit Varma]: this period in the 1960s and the sort of vicious circle that it leads to, where you have this sort
[Amit Varma]: of security apparatus, whose incentives are tailored towards continuing to have an enemy
[Amit Varma]: to fight against and therefore whose brutalities against this imagined and supposed, sometimes
[Amit Varma]: imagined and supposed enemies, actually create more disaffected people. And then it just becomes
[Amit Varma]: a spiral. And we've seen that spiral play out, you know, the 90s onwards. But, you know, until I read
[Amit Varma]: your book, I hadn't realized the extent to which it took solid shape in the 60s itself. So tell me
[Guest]: a bit about that. Yeah, so, you know, Kashmir always had this elements there who either wanted
[Guest]: to be part of Pakistan or wanted to be independent, right. And if you recall, during the
[Guest]: independence, in the Poonch side, there have been huge rebellions, etc. So in Kashmir Valley,
[Guest]: the militancy actually starts in the 1960s. It started then with very educated youngsters taking
[Guest]: up arms in a very limited way. Many of them were actually wanting to support the 1965 Pakistan
[Guest]: invaders. And then they went on to carry on with the militancy and there were bank robberies,
[Guest]: etc. And many of them are very educated. The fact is that these were these, you know,
[Guest]: young educated college graduates, etc. from well-to-do families, engineers, doctors, etc.
[Guest]: And these pioneers of militancy were definitely anti-India. They were very clear about the fact
[Guest]: that Kashmir should be independent or with Pakistan. When the militancy started,
[Guest]: these militants started doing bank robberies or attacks, police responded. And the more brutal
[Guest]: the police, the more rewards the police got from the state, meaning the state actively started
[Guest]: encouraging brutal policing. And thus began to come up one of the most important landmarks of
[Guest]: Kashmir which are interrogation centres. They started creating interrogation centres into
[Guest]: which these youngsters were hauled up and they were tortured and forced to confess whatever.
[Guest]: You can argue about the goodness or badness of waterboarding and torture, but I think in a
[Guest]: democracy it has no place. Now that phenomenon of militancy and the counter policing, unaccounted
[Guest]: policing, it began to pick pace, but did not really take off because by the 1970s, as you know,
[Guest]: the Sheikh Indira Accord came into being and Kashmir actually witnessed a large period of
[Guest]: peaceful democratic existence. And if India had, Indian leadership had made the efforts
[Guest]: in the 80s, Kashmir would have been a peaceful paradise.
[Guest]: But the political machinations that both centre, Congress and the local politicians did,
[Guest]: especially Farooq Abdullah and Rajiv Gandhi did in 1987, triggered the storm and it triggered
[Guest]: the new militancy which till day continues to consume Kashmir, consume India's democratic
[Guest]: credentials, consume thousands of lives of local ordinary people there and thousands of Indian
[Guest]: security forces. And even then, 87, so first the political manipulation happens and then as the
[Guest]: militancy picks up, instead of finding political solutions to the problem, India securitized the
[Guest]: entire Kashmir issue and sent more forces in, more interrogations came up, more agencies came in,
[Guest]: more cruelties came in. And while it is all happening, you have the monster of ISI and
[Guest]: Pakistan on the other side. On the other side, and that's the foolishness of the Indian
[Guest]: myopic political leadership of the day, that they couldn't realize the fact that
[Guest]: Pakistan had by then become a state where one was it was a state owned by the military,
[Guest]: second, the military's legitimacy largely came from and Pakistan's legitimacy largely came from
[Guest]: the struggle in fight for Kashmir. And in Afghanistan, you had the CIA, ISI sponsored
[Guest]: Mujahideen and by the end of the 80s, when the Soviet Union collapses, withdraws from there,
[Guest]: all of them, all the resources is diverted into Kashmir. And we have till date, we might say
[Guest]: anything. Indian state till date doesn't have neither the control over Kashmir narrative,
[Guest]: nor found a formula to deal with it. We have done the same things that the other side has been
[Guest]: doing. We can't take any much, much higher moral grounds than anyone else. And that's a frightening
[Guest]: part for a democracy to be playing as dirty as the militants or an ISI sponsored state is
[Guest]: embarrassing. So, Kashmir, in many ways, captures the decay that I'm talking about in the heart of
[Guest]: Indian democracy, which is that we let our agencies go to rot in Kashmir. And there are thousands of
[Guest]: floors that are being pumped into that state every year in the name of security. And we don't seem
[Guest]: to find any solution. We try various tactics, nothing seems to be working. And the latest
[Guest]: efforts by the Modi government to withdraw Article 370 and bifurcate the state doesn't seem to have
[Guest]: done anything much. It again looks to me that it will burst out any day. But Kashmir, what it did
[Guest]: was the Indian response in Kashmir to the militancy of the 60s and later in the 80s and 90s is to
[Guest]: contaminate the Indian democratic project while letting massive human rights violations and
[Guest]: sacrifices by Indian security agencies both. So, it's a very tragic tale of how, what could have
[Guest]: been the crown on India's head turning into an embarrassment and a shame. You mentioned
[Amit Varma]: interrogation centers and one of the striking details I was struck by in your book was that
[Amit Varma]: one of them was called Papa 2, which is such a benign name. I remember back in my days as a
[Amit Varma]: professional poker player, when I would win a big pot, I would often say come to Papa as I would
[Amit Varma]: bring the chips towards me. And, you know, so if I ever make a comeback, I can say come to Papa 2,
[Amit Varma]: which now has multiple shades of meaning. And it's also interesting that you point out how many
[Amit Varma]: of the people in that early swell in the 1960s were highly educated, which reminds me of exactly
[Amit Varma]: the same thing, what people talk about early Naxalism, that, you know, the best minds of the
[Amit Varma]: generation were kind of drawn to it, which I find so tragic, I mean, says a lot about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a little knowledge being a dangerous thing about misplaced idealism, you know, taking up arms
[Amit Varma]: against the state and all that never kind of works as an interesting sort of para I want to read out
[Amit Varma]: from your book, which refers to the 60s, but which actually seems resonant, far beyond that as well.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just read it out, where you talk about some of these torture chambers or interrogation
[Amit Varma]: centers, as it were, and you write quote, behind the soundproof walls of these buildings,
[Amit Varma]: a new narrative was created for Kashmir. Within these confines, the security forces tortured both
[Amit Varma]: militants and ordinary protesters. The torture in turn fed the anger and fury of the local narratives
[Amit Varma]: against India. Regardless of the explanation supplied by security agencies, the secret
[Amit Varma]: compounds of the interrogation centers tarnish the credentials of Indian democracy while feeding the
[Amit Varma]: ranks of militancy. And as violence rose, security deployment went up further, and so did the number
[Amit Varma]: of interrogation centers. Meanwhile, Pakistan had over the years established an efficient network of
[Amit Varma]: informants, couriers, gossip mongers and overground workers with extensive funding channels. As it
[Amit Varma]: pumped in more money and militants into Kashmir, India increased its own deployment of security
[Amit Varma]: forces and created even more interrogation centers. The business of militancy was flourishing,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. So you know, before I come to the 90s, and you know, ask you to elaborate on how
[Amit Varma]: all of this spun out of control, a tangential thought, which is a few years ago, I read this
[Amit Varma]: great book by David Galula called counter insurgency warfare. And, you know, a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: lessons in that are lessons that, for example, speak to the mistakes that the US made in Vietnam,
[Amit Varma]: or that we made in Kashmir throughout, or that people have always made fighting counter
[Amit Varma]: insurgents, where Galula's fundamental point made by many others, and learned by the US to some
[Amit Varma]: extent after the invasion of Iraq went out of whack, was that you don't fight a counter insurgency
[Amit Varma]: just by defeating that proximate bunch of people who turn up as militants and, you know, just
[Amit Varma]: getting rid of them and killing them. It involves really getting the local people on your side. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, T.E. Lawrence once spoke about how, you know, beating a counter insurgency is like eating
[Amit Varma]: soup with a knife. It's incredibly difficult. And the typical formula for that, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: again comes from Galula, is that it has to be 20% military 80% political. And it seems to me that at
[Amit Varma]: some level, this lesson, like first of all, the Indian establishment took completely the wrong
[Amit Varma]: approach to it. Almost none of it was political, it was really 100% military from what it would
[Amit Varma]: seem to me. And it continues that way, the thinking still percolates that way. And that
[Amit Varma]: sense of you need to gain the trust of the local people and all of that simply doesn't happen. So
[Amit Varma]: tell me about, you know, one, your views on this. And, you know, so many people within the security
[Amit Varma]: establishment, was there a sense that this should be done differently? Or even looking back in
[Amit Varma]: hindsight today, that this could have been done differently. Like I read this great book by David
[Amit Varma]: Devdas called A Generation of Rage in Kashmir, where he postulates that, you know, the Kashmir
[Amit Varma]: problem was kind of improving by the middle of the aughties. You know, Vajpayee spoke to Musharraf
[Amit Varma]: and or was it Nawaz Sharif, I forget, but you had talks happening, you had things coming down,
[Amit Varma]: there was a new generation of people in Kashmir who wanted jobs, who wanted economic progress,
[Amit Varma]: all of that. But the security establishment that was there, just continued with their oppressive
[Amit Varma]: ways, torturing innocent people, building narratives, and that just disenchanted an
[Amit Varma]: entirely new generation. And then we entered another spiral at that point in time. So just
[Amit Varma]: at an attitudinal level, just at that level of understanding that fine, at one hand, there is a
[Amit Varma]: terrorism problem, Pakistan is sending people, all that is happening, you know, we need to
[Amit Varma]: beat that back with a firm hand. But at the same time, you also need to do the 80% politics to go
[Amit Varma]: with the 20% military and that was never done. First of all, would you agree with it? And if so,
[Amit Varma]: is there a sense of recognition of that within the establishment, even in hindsight,
[Guest]: even now after the ship has sailed? So I don't think so. I think if you look at
[Guest]: the present government, it's a very securitized, communalized view of Kashmir, which is very
[Guest]: unfortunate, which might get them immediate votes in the rest of India. But it's a disaster for
[Guest]: India, if you ask me, for democracy, Indian democracy. In the past, you're right, there have been efforts, there have been moments when we thought there is a breakthrough coming,
[Guest]: especially in 2000, during the Hezbollah Mujahideen ceasefire. And if that ceasefire, while it was
[Guest]: called off from Pakistan by Sayyid Salahuddin, because I had interviewed Abdul Majid, the
[Guest]: military commander on ground, and there were enough people on ground who were supporting that
[Guest]: efforts at peace, and it could have been a dramatic breakthrough. But my own reading those
[Guest]: days, because I was actively reporting, is that many within the Indian system did not want any
[Guest]: risky affair, which could bring peace into Kashmir. Because by then, our military leadership,
[Guest]: our intelligence leadership, leadership of the paramilitary forces, etc., etc., a generation of
[Guest]: them had all earned their medals and applauds in Kashmir. They had tested power, unbridled power.
[Guest]: And in that, military is also to be blamed in Kashmir's problem. They almost actively scuttled
[Guest]: or misled the political establishment. Otherwise, we could have had peace. There have been moments
[Guest]: in all through, during watch face time, there was moments when we thought we are very close to
[Guest]: peace. But I think that is where the agencies played dirty and people created their own
[Guest]: narratives. If there was proper accountability and proper audit of the agencies and Kashmir
[Guest]: situation, I think we could have found breakthroughs at various points of time.
[Guest]: See, what happens that many societies have grievances. But a mature democracy would find
[Guest]: its ways like the Irish problem or others, would find political means of mellowing it down and
[Guest]: weaning away the anger over a period of time. And that is a very patient political process.
[Guest]: If I am not wrong, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Ireland ran for over a decade,
[Guest]: decade and a half before it punished a policeman or anybody. So, it is a very patient, it is a
[Guest]: very demanding task and nation building itself is a very demanding task. I think our political
[Guest]: leadership failed on both ends and Kashmir became the prime example. But mind you, not just Kashmir,
[Guest]: if you look at Nagaland, Northeast, all of it, we have a very, very poor track record in dealing
[Guest]: with militancy. Globally, post Second World War, the average militancy has been, I think,
[Guest]: 8 to 10 years old. Within that, either it is defeated or political solutions are found.
[Guest]: But in our country, the Naga insurgency problem continues to date after,
[Guest]: started in independence, continues to date. So, in all these places, if you dispassionately look
[Guest]: from a perspective of state building, politically, you will realize that it is the lack of
[Guest]: accountability of our agencies, including our military, while it is operating on ground,
[Guest]: that has led to this crisis and to the million mutinies that you are witnessing today.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I had a very memorable episode with Srinath Raghavan right after, you know,
[Amit Varma]: 370 was repealed, which is to date the most downloaded episode of my podcast. And it is
[Amit Varma]: really good because Srinath is such an amazing historian. Now, one of the things that you've
[Amit Varma]: pointed out is how these security agencies, many of which the common man may not even be
[Amit Varma]: aware of, have proliferated, where at one point you write, quote, the army is only one piece of
[Amit Varma]: the Indian security web in the valley. Until the 1960s, the IB was India's prime and only
[Amit Varma]: federal intelligence agency dealing with J&K. By the late 60s, R&AW was established to deal with
[Amit Varma]: external intelligence. Within a few years, started its operation in Kashmir. As India
[Amit Varma]: struggled with internal strife and external threats, new intelligence agencies and security
[Amit Varma]: arms were added. Almost two dozen intelligence agencies of various kinds exist in India today.
[Amit Varma]: Some are part of larger forces like the paramilitary or state police, and others are
[Amit Varma]: standalone agencies. And many of them have a significant presence in Kashmir. Now, what also
[Amit Varma]: strikes me about that is incentive theme that has played out across pretty much all my episodes
[Amit Varma]: about how people respond to incentives. And there are two kinds of incentives at play. And one is
[Amit Varma]: just a larger incentives. Like one of the things that we have seen from the Pakistani military
[Amit Varma]: being so powerful out there is that they need to keep Kashmir on the boil always alive, because
[Amit Varma]: that is where they get a lot of their power and their budgets and their justifications and all of
[Amit Varma]: the narratives that they use to thrive. Similarly, even for the Indian military establishment,
[Amit Varma]: it is in their interest to have an enemy, because that is then their justification. If, you know,
[Amit Varma]: suddenly we were guaranteed eternal peace by some miracle, military establishments would not
[Amit Varma]: like that. So in a sense, there is that at a larger level, there is that imperative to keep
[Amit Varma]: the pot boiling. At a smaller level. Also, there are all kinds of incentives in play like one is
[Amit Varma]: power always corrupts when your security establishment gets so much power in Kashmir,
[Amit Varma]: where they're giving away building contracts, and there's so many opportunities of corruption,
[Amit Varma]: they're obviously never going to let it go. And they're never going to do anything that could
[Amit Varma]: diminish their presence and their power in in the area. And also direct incentives like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: security forces at the time as you have written about as David Devdas wrote about in his books,
[Amit Varma]: were rewarded for quote unquote kills, the more people you kill, the greater the reward. And that
[Amit Varma]: led to a position where all the time repeatedly and you've of course highlighted some egregious
[Amit Varma]: episodes of this, but all the time, people were being framed and killed in fake encounters
[Amit Varma]: as terrorists so that people could get reward for kills in a different context in the context of
[Amit Varma]: Bombay, which we'll come to after a while, you point out how where how informers were in fact
[Amit Varma]: expected to radicalize young Muslims. So those young Muslims could then be picked up by the
[Amit Varma]: security establishment, which is just crazy. And this is almost ubiquitous in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: about Punjab, which I'd like to talk about next about Punjab, you also mentioned that a similar
[Amit Varma]: incentive existed, which led to all kinds of innocent people being constantly picked up and
[Amit Varma]: killed off. And this reminds me of the cobra effect, where you know, in colonial times,
[Amit Varma]: the British authorities, they had a problem of too many cobras in Delhi. So they offered
[Amit Varma]: incentives for getting rid of cobras, they said for every dead cobra that you bring in,
[Amit Varma]: we'll pay you some money. And what happened is what you would expect people started breeding cobras
[Amit Varma]: to get some of that money, then the establishment realized that this is not working out. So they
[Amit Varma]: remove the reward. And then the people who were breeding cobras, let the cobras lose. And you
[Amit Varma]: actually had more cobras in before. I don't know if you you'd agree that that seems to be an apt
[Amit Varma]: metaphor. Yeah. So how earlier you said you were pessimistic about liberal democracy,
[Amit Varma]: not just looking at the incentives of the situation here like talking, continuing on
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir for a moment before we get to Punjab. You know, how could things ever get better? I mean,
[Amit Varma]: were there causes of optimism? What could have reversed this? Were there efforts to
[Amit Varma]: reverse this? Like you point out that, you know, you were in Kashmir for a while you met
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Dar while he was, you know, negotiating for peace with India. And of course, he got brutally
[Amit Varma]: murdered soon after that. And those efforts came to nothing. So does this become an inevitable
[Amit Varma]: downward spiral? That once you enter this situation, where a powerful security apparatus
[Amit Varma]: is given power, that, you know, in a country where there are no safeguards, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: where this kind of structure is there by design? What are your thoughts on this? Is this one of
[Amit Varma]: the reasons you're pessimistic? And if so, when you speak about your wanting to write,
[Amit Varma]: because writing makes a difference? Can it make a difference to this?
[Guest]: The first part, which is that, can it be undone? The incentive structures, etc, etc. I think it's
[Guest]: doable. Today, you know, as you know, the kills part. So militants are graded ABCD and depending
[Guest]: upon the grade of militant that you kill, there are rewards available to policemen, etc. Those
[Guest]: obviously that reward system has been completely corrupted also. The security agencies have built
[Guest]: such complex infrastructures and power centers within Kashmir. In fact, in about 10 years ago,
[Guest]: there was very credible inputs about how a section of the army was orchestrating grenade
[Guest]: throwing because the violence was going down in Kashmir. So, yeah, so it can be, it can be
[Guest]: dismantled. You need strong, moralistic political leadership committed to the idea of a democratic
[Guest]: India, not to some fantasy of a majoritarian state, not to the fantasy of some oligarchy
[Guest]: ruled country. If you are committed to liberal democratic ideas, it's a patient process,
[Guest]: but it's a doable process because there are n number of examples around the world
[Guest]: where you have seen corrupted democracies. For example, in the US, the Gilded Age gave way to
[Guest]: a liberal democratic phase. In the UK, you have had insurgencies, the Irish rebels bombing London
[Guest]: and other places. You have seen n number of such cases. So it's not that democracies can't mature,
[Guest]: but that maturing of democracy is not achieved through elections. It is achieved through
[Guest]: the emergence of leaders who are committed to democratic ideals. And that is where my,
[Guest]: that's a cause of, one of the cause of my pessimism because even leaders who have emerged
[Guest]: in recent times do not give me the hope of democracy because they all turned out to be
[Guest]: little people in pursuit of power, pretending to be Gandhi, but deep inside, very small minded men
[Guest]: are stuck on petty power. So that's a cause of pessimism, but to answer your question,
[Guest]: it can be dismantled. It's doable. Countries have done it. Come to the second question,
[Guest]: whether writing makes an impact. Writing is the only thing that will make impact.
[Guest]: Writing is what will trigger revolutions. Writing is what will get people on the streets. Writing
[Guest]: is what will cause protests. Writing is what will make people think. Writing is what will
[Guest]: make people talk loudly in the public square. You know what I'm saying?
[Amit Varma]: I absolutely know what you're saying. And it is so inspiring, writing and
[Amit Varma]: podcasting, who knows? But you know, just to push back on the earlier question, like one,
[Amit Varma]: I would argue that, or rather, I have a question like the examples you pointed to
[Amit Varma]: are kind of different. They don't have to do with the structure of the state. Like sure,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the Irish problem is a political problem. I agree that political problems
[Amit Varma]: are solvable over a period of time, if there is will. And also there is, one can imagine incentives
[Amit Varma]: for the politicians to solve those problems, you know, all of that. But here, the problem that we
[Amit Varma]: have is a classic problem of a state becoming more and more powerful and bigger and bigger,
[Amit Varma]: which states tend to do, power constantly corrupting, and you enter this kind of a vicious
[Amit Varma]: cycle. Is there anywhere in the world where something like that has changed, where an
[Amit Varma]: autocratic state has actually been reined in using democratic methods, like not a war or a
[Amit Varma]: coup or whatever? Can you think of an example where that has actually happened?
[Guest]: I'm not a historian. So I don't know whether I would be able to give an appropriate example.
[Guest]: But I would say that what the US saw in the last century, if you take the pre Second World War
[Guest]: period, and what happened later, there are a lot of parallels to what's happening in India.
[Guest]: So there were robber barons, there was, the church had more political influence, probably.
[Guest]: So there have been changes.
[Amit Varma]: But that didn't have anything to do with the structure of the state.
[Guest]: Yeah, that is true. Structure of the state. So you know, our problem is that problem that
[Guest]: you're pointing out is not a problem that can't be solved. The state becoming more and more
[Guest]: powerful, the powerful state can be dismantled in favour of a more republic, more liberal state,
[Guest]: a republic state, is a doable process, if you have strong leaderships at both at the political
[Guest]: level and judiciary level and even media. Right now, we are living through an era of big
[Guest]: of pygmies. And so it looks very intimidating to dismantle the powerful state sector. Right.
[Guest]: But when giants come, it won't be impossible is my take.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, my, my pushback on that is that we are living in an age of pygmies, because the
[Amit Varma]: incentives are designed to produce pygmies, like you're speaking of an entitled, moralistic
[Amit Varma]: leadership, those kind of people won't even enter politics to begin with, because it's pointless.
[Amit Varma]: And if they do enter politics, you know, they'll get corroded by the process till none of the
[Amit Varma]: moralism actually remains by the time they get to wherever they want to get to. It's all,
[Amit Varma]: it's all signalling and posturing. By that point, I think the giants are more in other areas,
[Amit Varma]: like writing the area that you are in politics, I think will, you know, so it just feels like a
[Amit Varma]: vicious circle to me for that reason. But you know, equally, what makes me positive sometimes
[Amit Varma]: is that technology can empower individuals. So who knows what will happen in the future. But as of
[Amit Varma]: now, if the system is to be changed, it can only be changed by those who are benefiting the most
[Amit Varma]: from it. So why would they change it? So we get caught in this kind of complicated...
[Guest]: Ah, but, but Amit, history is not a logical moment, no? History is a lot of accidents and
[Guest]: incidents. So did you, 20 years ago, did you think that there could be an Indian who will donate
[Guest]: most of his life saving, which is substantially more than what we can imagine? Somebody like a
[Amit Varma]: Premji would come along? I would actually assume that someone like a Premji would inevitably come
[Amit Varma]: along in private life, because there have been examples like that in public life, including some
[Amit Varma]: of the robber barons that you mentioned earlier, say someone like Rockefeller. But I would not
[Amit Varma]: imagine that kind of a public spirit in government, in politics, which is where I'm happy to be proved
[Guest]: wrong if it ever happens, which is... No, I'll come to you, Amit. In 2009, I used to be taunted
[Guest]: by my bosses saying that, what corruption stories are you bringing? Who is interested? Right? I would
[Guest]: bring some scams, some allegations, you know, some audit report. They would all say that nobody's
[Guest]: interested in these stories. And they were true, because no, it triggered nothing. 2G scam had
[Guest]: happened in 2008. But by 2010, this country went into a different frenzy, that you had millions of
[Guest]: middle class people out on the streets, the same or many of them today who are communal, who are
[Guest]: supporting a majoritarian state, they were out on the streets demanding, I mean, they didn't know
[Guest]: what Lokmahal meant, but they were already a corruption free society. Right? And, and mind you,
[Guest]: if you look at Aam Aadmi Party, I mean, I'm not a supporter of the party, but the time from within
[Guest]: which a very powerful political movement emerged is unbelievable. Right? You own very little
[Guest]: resources. You cannot rule out the happenstance that future holds and potentials. Let's not
[Guest]: underestimate, see, India, despite all of Modi's efforts, India still has a very vibrant civil
[Guest]: society. And on a bad day, not even bad day, on a normal day for decades, Indian democracy has
[Guest]: been held on the shoulders, has been carried forward by few individuals, spirited lawyers,
[Guest]: some journalists, some activists. That's a reality, because our institutions have not been
[Guest]: maturing enough. Well, so you can never predict what could be in the store. So that is optimism
[Guest]: with which I write. And I talk because we are writing against people who might have a lot of
[Guest]: power today. But I know that if they were to misuse the power beyond a point, the very people
[Amit Varma]: who are supporting them will rise up in revolt. Yeah, and that's a great point about civil society.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, one of the, possibly the highlight of the last two years, which have been a very
[Amit Varma]: dismal time, but the highlight of the last two years in terms of what's been happening in the
[Amit Varma]: public space is how civil society protested against NRC, you know, where you had young
[Amit Varma]: people across the country coming out and waving the preamble, like who would have thunk though,
[Amit Varma]: I wish it was the Ambedkar version of the preamble and not the Indira Gandhi version,
[Amit Varma]: with the toxic word socialism thrown in with all its state coercion and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But regardless, that's still heartening. So hopefully, things change. Let's talk about
[Amit Varma]: Punjab now. Because in a sense, what unfolded later in Kashmir in terms of what the security
[Amit Varma]: establishment did and the lessons it learned was something that you also see mirrored in the
[Amit Varma]: Punjab problem, where it is actually Indira Gandhi after losing the elections post the emergency
[Amit Varma]: realizes that the party is doing really badly in Congress, they are coming third there, they need
[Amit Varma]: someone to, you know, counteract the Kali Dal. And Sanjay Gandhi, you mentioned in your book
[Amit Varma]: meets with a couple of potential candidates, the first one doesn't look fierce enough.
[Amit Varma]: So he eventually chooses Bhindranwale. So Bhindranwale was really therefore a creation
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, arose out of a political imperative, and was then given shape by the
[Amit Varma]: security establishment and protected by it till it got to a point where the incentives diverged.
[Amit Varma]: And you also point out, for example, how Bhindranwale did his first killing of a newspaper
[Amit Varma]: publisher, he was actually protected for a while by Gyanizal Singh, who would go on to become
[Amit Varma]: India's president. And once said that he would clean toilets for Indira Gandhi if he was asked to
[Amit Varma]: and Bhajan Lal, the Chief Minister of Haryana. So tell me a bit about that sort of period and
[Amit Varma]: the lessons we learned like the 80s old fascinating lessons. It's really interesting that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, both Indira and Rajiv, in a sense were killed by monsters that they created.
[Amit Varma]: In Rajiv's case, of course, the monster was partly created by his mother as well.
[Amit Varma]: But the Bhindranwale monster was created by Indira, the LTTE around the same time,
[Amit Varma]: late 70s was propped up by the security establishment, and so on. So tell me a bit
[Amit Varma]: about that period, and especially from the prism that is there in your book of watching
[Amit Varma]: the security establishment at play and what those events reveal about it, and how those lessons
[Amit Varma]: then go on to, you know, the 87 elections in Kashmir and what happens next.
[Guest]: See, one of the worst things about Indira Gandhi, if I may say, was that she did not look across
[Guest]: to Pakistan and draw the right lessons. There already was enough lessons about the monsters
[Guest]: rising, how when the states are creating militants, terrorists, etc. for state purpose, it will
[Guest]: devour the state itself. And she made these mistakes. And if you really look at it impartially,
[Guest]: in many ways, she is responsible for her own killings and her son's killings. So beyond a
[Guest]: point in an Asian state, armed insurgencies, if they become part of the state tool, then it is
[Guest]: going to have disastrous consequences. And we played with it in the 70s and 80s. And Kanjab
[Guest]: problem, if you look at it, while there have been, you know, all kinds of disgruntlement in Punjab
[Guest]: since the 47 Akali issue, etc. If Bindranwale was not propped up and provided the resources that
[Guest]: the Congress provided and the support provided, we would not have had an Operation Blue Star.
[Guest]: We probably would not have had the assassination of Indira Gandhi. And we would not have had the
[Guest]: anti-Muslim pogrom. And India would have been a much more liberal, safer place. All of this
[Guest]: happened because of a very nasty, short-sighted pursuit of power in Punjab. And not for nationally,
[Guest]: just for a state. And see what it came up with. And when it began to get out of hand,
[Guest]: what does the state do? State securitize the problem. You deploy policemen with,
[Guest]: and military for a short while, but policemen with all kinds of power saying that go, kill,
[Guest]: kidnap, rape, do what you want, but I want peace. That's not peace. That's thagari, that is cruelty,
[Guest]: that is murder, that's killing. So, you blessed a generation of policemen out there to become
[Guest]: state-sponsored killers. And vicious cycle that continues to play even today. Even today,
[Guest]: thousands of families in Punjab and abroad, meaning Sikhs, they don't know where their
[Guest]: dear ones are. People have just disappeared because police has kidnapped and killed and
[Guest]: tortured and militants killed on the other side. But the discussion cannot be drawing a parity
[Guest]: between the militants and police. So, what militants are killing, so we will also kill. No,
[Guest]: militants are militants. They are criminals. They are not the state. The state has a paratus which
[Guest]: is bound by written constitution and its laws. And we violated it. And Indira Gandhi, in her
[Guest]: whatever strategic vision it was, she empowered, created the LTT out there and other Tamil
[Guest]: militants in Sri Lanka. That also had such blowback on India. And look at the cumulative
[Guest]: effect of such short-sighted decisions of that era that not only do we have Rajiv Gandhi being
[Guest]: assassinated by LTT, we also have a military disaster in Sri Lanka. And at the end of it,
[Guest]: you have thousands of Tamils butchered in a modern world. And you see the rise of another
[Guest]: strong family in Sri Lanka which is completely scuttling democracy. So, India, unless we do
[Guest]: very honest introspection of how our political politicians have been and continues to use
[Guest]: use state power and violence as a means to further their power, we will not be able to move into a
[Guest]: mature democracy. And I say this being very conscious of what's happening today and what
[Amit Varma]: the arc of Narendra Modi also tells us. One of the sort of stories I was very struck by
[Amit Varma]: and someone who also must have been inspiring to you for not investigative journalism per se,
[Amit Varma]: but a kind of investigative zeal is Jaswant Singh Khalra, who I hadn't heard of again
[Amit Varma]: till your book and what a remarkable story. Tell me a little bit about him.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, in fact, of all the people that I have written about, he's probably the most
[Guest]: fascinating and one of the most saddest stories because he came from this famed family. His
[Guest]: grandfather was a freedom fighter, etc. And he is the one who actually, in a systematic manner
[Guest]: uncovers the police brutality in Punjab. And what he does is he goes around collecting details of
[Guest]: firewood that is given for funeral pyres. And it is a licensed government thing. So
[Guest]: there is a logging happening at some end for firewood that is wood that is given for funeral
[Guest]: pyres. And using that he proves that the number of people cremated in districts like Amritsar
[Guest]: and present-day Taran-Taran are several times more than what was officially being recorded.
[Guest]: And he, from there, he starts recording the brutality of the state police and the encounter
[Guest]: killings and the disappearances. And he becomes so powerful that KPS Gill, then the police,
[Guest]: he comes down to Amritsar to challenge him for public debate, this, that, what,
[Guest]: what. But Khalra is not intimidated because he is cut from a different kind of cloth.
[Guest]: And he continues to record 2-3 thousand disappearances of cases. And finally the
[Guest]: police got so irritated with him that they just kidnapped him. And he has also disappeared.
[Guest]: So, his legacy continued. And during the time he has been kidnapped,
[Guest]: the Supreme Court takes notice of it and there are efforts, but the state government and the
[Guest]: police lies to the Supreme Court. And Khalra is killed meanwhile. But his findings have found
[Guest]: judicial approval. But that has not brought justice to Punjab because at various stages in the
[Guest]: National Human Rights Commission, even Supreme Court, justice has been watered away. And because
[Guest]: ultimately in India, we do not believe in individual liberties, individual rights. So,
[Guest]: it has been watered away. Even today, there are thousands of families in Punjab who are
[Guest]: looking for their dear ones, something to know about it. But it was Khalra who actually
[Guest]: triggered that fight back. And that is what I was saying that history is very, very,
[Guest]: you cannot say, if you had met Khalra as a young man, probably you would not predict that this man
[Guest]: could shake up the entire Punjab story. And even today, there are youngsters, young lawyers I know,
[Guest]: who are carrying on with Khalra's fight. Very smart lawyers. So, it is a long drawn battle.
[Guest]: It is like the Bhopal gas tragedy. The fighters live on, they are there,
[Guest]: they continue to fight. We may not know their fight. So, I am not an expert on Khalra or Punjab.
[Guest]: I just came across his story and I said, oh, this fits into what I have been saying.
[Guest]: So, I read about him and wrote about him. I wish I had known about him much long ago. I mean,
[Guest]: I wish I had met him because he would have been such an inspirational figure. I mean,
[Guest]: what a smart investigative strategy to go looking for the wood that is used for fires.
[Guest]: I mean, which policeman would think that his crime would be captured in a log kept
[Guest]: on the wood that is supplied? I mean, to me, it is like the highest standards,
[Guest]: the gold standard of investigative journalism or investigations.
[Guest]: So, he is, yeah, I mean, but all of it is a tragedy. He was also killed. But the man,
[Guest]: yeah, man accused of killing him, the police officer, he finally committed suicide.
[Amit Varma]: So, all sides pays. Yeah, but I mean, that's a scant
[Amit Varma]: consolation. No, but it's a kind of good story that could so easily be made into a film or a
[Amit Varma]: web series that, you know, you have these incentives where they are being rewarded
[Amit Varma]: for killing terrorists. So, you assume that they must be killing lots of innocent people,
[Amit Varma]: but how the hell do you prove it? Then you figure out that, wait a second,
[Amit Varma]: the police has to cremate these people for which they have to buy wood. And then he goes off and
[Amit Varma]: then he, you know, does an audit of all the firewood sold in the state and he calculates
[Amit Varma]: so many thousands of people have been killed. And then eventually he is abducted by the police,
[Amit Varma]: tortured, killed, chopped up, and the body parts thrown in the Sutlej. Absolutely crazy story. And
[Amit Varma]: you also point out that this is not really an outlier. It's probably an outlier in terms of
[Amit Varma]: the ingenuity, but how activists were treated. Very much par for the course. You speak about
[Amit Varma]: people like Ram Singh Billing, Ajit Singh Bans, Param Satyajit Singh, Malvinder Singh Malli,
[Amit Varma]: Jagvinder Singh. And these are like lawyers. These are people you would imagine would have some kind
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, influence or ways of protecting themselves or whatever. But, you know, they all
[Guest]: disappear and this is all just par for the course. And what happens? Yeah, the Punjabis and Punjab
[Guest]: and Kashmir and Nagaland, etc. are all the same story. I mean, you know, the state let the security
[Guest]: apparatus go berserk. And policemen thought they are the state and they behaved like one.
[Guest]: They just became killer squads. And it continues. It continues even today.
[Guest]: It has not gotten away. I mean, it needs to end somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, maybe not in terms of killing, but what we see with Bhima Koregaon case,
[Amit Varma]: which you've also written about so eloquently in your last chapter, and you know, and some
[Amit Varma]: could argue what happened to Stan Swamy is an extrajudicial killing. So, you know, now tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about Rajiv Gandhi's approach, because Rajiv takes power and he's this callow
[Amit Varma]: young man, perhaps drunk on power to some extent. And there are just so many in different contexts,
[Amit Varma]: so many political missteps that he takes, which prove disastrous. But one of them, of course,
[Amit Varma]: is the whole IPKF thing, which is a classic example of how, you know, if you create a monster,
[Amit Varma]: you don't know if you can control it. And I wonder if that even has current resonance,
[Amit Varma]: like you mentioned how, you know, both Indira and Rajiv were killed by monsters created in a sense
[Amit Varma]: by Indira. And I wonder how that applies to current day leaders and the monsters that they create?
[Amit Varma]: Can you control them? Where does it all end? And when I see political leaders pandering to all
[Amit Varma]: these extreme emotions, it just feels that, you know, they haven't really learned the lessons
[Amit Varma]: of history either. So tell me a little bit about all of that, because one of the striking features
[Amit Varma]: of that whole IPKF misadventure, where basically for listeners who might not be aware, Rajiv did
[Amit Varma]: a deal with the Sri Lankan government that, hey, we'll send the Indian Peacekeeping Force, IPKF,
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, we'll send our military and we'll take care of your Tamil extremism problem for you.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, the Tamil extremism problem was created by India in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: And all the security forces told their political overlords that, listen, we created them,
[Amit Varma]: we tell them to put down arms, they will put down arms. And then they go there and they find that
[Amit Varma]: it's a completely different story. This is another monster they can't control. Tell me a bit about
[Guest]: that period. To me, the story of Prabhakaran and Rajiv is very interesting, right? One is a
[Guest]: political princeling. And the other is a romantic who left studies midways and become a militant.
[Guest]: And for a short while, they were friends. Prabhakaran was actually flown to Delhi.
[Guest]: And if I'm not wrong, it's Rahul Gandhi who carries his father's Rajiv Gandhi's bulletproof
[Guest]: jacket, which Rajiv Gandhi gives to Prabhakaran. And Prabhakaran comes back to Jaffna. By the time
[Guest]: IPKF has landed, IPKF flown in from Hyderabad. So, the GOC of the division told me they went with
[Guest]: tourist maps of Jaffna. He said, I sent my soldiers out to Hyderabad market to buy
[Guest]: tourist maps of Sri Lanka. That is how well prepared they were. Anyway, they land up there
[Guest]: and they thought that Prabhakaran can be bullied around. And they told him to lay down arms
[Guest]: and as agreed. And one leads to the other and within months, the Rajiv-Prabhakaran friendship
[Guest]: collapses. And Rajiv sends one of the world's most powerful militaries on an operation, which
[Guest]: is probably the most dramatic military operation of recent memories. I can't think of another
[Guest]: operation anywhere in the world. The operation to capture Prabhakaran and his LTT leadership from
[Guest]: Jaffna University. You have the commando raid and as the helicopter lands, the LTT is waiting
[Guest]: for them because I think LTT was listening into the radio communication. And the troops that are
[Guest]: moving on ground towards Jaffna, they encounter all kinds of obstacles. And some of them are
[Guest]: taken for a ride by Tamils. Many of them are met with children and women providing cover to LTT
[Guest]: militants at the hospital, in a civil hospital there in Jaffna. Whatever may happen, Indian
[Guest]: military says, militants fired from inside the hospital, but for the next two days, they will
[Guest]: preserve their butcher people. Finally, it's Black Hawk down 10 times bigger. When Prabhakaran
[Guest]: disappears from there, leaves behind at the football ground, if I'm not wrong, just one
[Guest]: injured Indian soldier. He said, let him be alive so that he can go back and tell his masters what
[Guest]: I'm capable of. And Prabhakaran digs down and stays underground for the next several years,
[Guest]: plotting his way back and he gets Rajiv. So that's it. So even the greatest military
[Guest]: is not capable of solving a political problem. It has to be a political solution.
[Guest]: That's a big takeaway for me in the story. And Prabhakaran craves by power. And once you test
[Guest]: violence, you can never give it up. You can't become... People might say that every saint has
[Guest]: a past and every criminal has a future and all that, but he couldn't give up. By the mid of 2000s,
[Guest]: he could have had an autonomous Northeast region. Everything was in his favor. And people like
[Guest]: Anton Balasingham actually told him, let's buy this space. Let's have an autonomous region. No,
[Guest]: he has to fight for freedom. He has to create his country and he also ends up dead in a backwater,
[Guest]: in a lake. So Rajiv Gandhi, in his brashness as a young Prime Minister, he goes into Sri Lanka,
[Guest]: sends military into Sri Lanka for nothing and pays for it with his life. And parallelly
[Guest]: in Kashmir with Farooq Abdullah, he lets Farooq have a field day in Kashmir and they manipulate
[Guest]: elections and Kashmir erupts in violence and the violence continues till date. So,
[Guest]: legacy of Rajiv Gandhi, while there are a lot of good things we can talk about him and he truly
[Guest]: had a very visionary idea for India, but practically on ground, he messed up the Indian
[Amit Varma]: democracy project big time. Very true. And the 87 elections, as you've pointed out, was rigged so
[Amit Varma]: blatantly that an entire generation of militants were created from there. You mentioned people
[Amit Varma]: like Saeed Salahuddin, Saeed Ali Shah Jilani, Yasin Malik, Javed Mir, Shabbir Shah's brother,
[Amit Varma]: Mohammed Saeed Shah. They were all taking part in the elections, trying to be part of the democratic
[Amit Varma]: process. But once the whole thing was rigged, they said, forget it. We're not going to get
[Amit Varma]: anything done this way. And of course, one can imagine why they thought that way. It was rational.
[Amit Varma]: And so they go into militancy and everything kind of gradually begins to go to hell. So that's one
[Amit Varma]: interesting strand there. Let's move back. There are really two more places I want to talk about
[Amit Varma]: where you've got interesting narratives in your book. And I'll save Gujarat for last, because I
[Amit Varma]: think that that narrative of the Gujarat model, as it were, of the security establishment is
[Amit Varma]: something that has great resonance for what is happening right now at a national level. So we'll
[Amit Varma]: save that for last. But tell me a little bit about Mumbai. You know, the first big section of your
[Amit Varma]: book, which could have been a book in itself, absolutely gripping section, is about Mumbai,
[Amit Varma]: is about, you know, this friend that you made there called Wahid, you know, and there is so much
[Amit Varma]: happening there. So how did you, like what you have done in that interesting section
[Amit Varma]: is in a very novelistic way, you've interspersed a personal narrative of this person called Wahid
[Amit Varma]: and made him such a flesh and blood, real life figure that the reader empathizes with,
[Amit Varma]: and tied in the rest of the narrative of whatever is happening with the legit terrorism that is
[Amit Varma]: there with the security establishment doing all the nonsense that it is doing with not only the
[Amit Varma]: way they fight the legit terrorism, but also the way they keep kind of framing people and
[Amit Varma]: victimizing poor Muslims like Wahid himself. It's really interesting. So how did all of this begin
[Amit Varma]: to take shape in your mind? And when did you sort of come to the conclusion that
[Amit Varma]: this is a major story that what is happening in Mumbai, the framing of these people, the way
[Amit Varma]: the security establishment kind of has been working here, you know, tell me about your
[Amit Varma]: impetus of looking deeper into that. And was this perhaps the first instance of when you
[Amit Varma]: really got to see the depths of depravity that the security establishment can fall prey to?
[Guest]: So when I began my book, Wahid was not a big subject of my book. I was looking at writing
[Guest]: about the business of terror is that and I started research. So in fact, my original
[Guest]: chapterization is the book was in the reverse. It begins with Kashmir and Wahid was the second part.
[Guest]: It was editor Ajitha who said that let's reverse it. See, being a beat reporter, I knew that in
[Guest]: 2006 when the train bomb blast happened, the claims made by the ATS of Maharashtra
[Guest]: was completely fake and false. And as a reporter, I also knew that later the real terrorists,
[Guest]: Indian Mujahideen terrorists were caught and they had owned up to the bombings.
[Guest]: So I knew that I'm going to talk about it. But what I did not realize was that Wahid and his
[Guest]: other co-accused have filed copious amounts of documents in the trial court detailing the
[Guest]: torture that they went through, detailing the depravity of the Indian security establishment.
[Guest]: Because I think at some level they were innocent probably or they were very committed jihadis.
[Guest]: Whatever it is, they showed great trust, faith and courage in the judiciary of India. And that's
[Guest]: what attracted me when I started interacting with Wahid. I realized that look, these guys,
[Guest]: everything that he's saying is there out somewhere recorded. So when you're writing against powerful
[Guest]: institutions and people, while they could harass you, one thing that I wanted to be sure which as
[Guest]: a journalist is my duty is to ensure that you don't make wild allegations which are not backed
[Guest]: by documents. And in his case, it's pure gold. While his lives were ruined, they have recorded
[Guest]: that and I hope whatever was recorded in that court proceedings, I hope future police officers
[Guest]: and intelligence officers of this country would read and draw the right lessons from that,
[Guest]: those documentations. The Indian police service should put its head down in shame for the
[Guest]: embarrassing way in which many of their so-called senior IPS officers behaved in their case.
[Guest]: So, since 2006, I knew that this was a fake claim and the real terrorists have not been caught.
[Guest]: But when I started meeting with Wahid, I realized that his story actually goes back
[Guest]: and his entire life took a turn after 9-11. So, it was the waves of 9-11 attacks that hits the
[Guest]: Bombay slum where Wahid lived and the US attack happens, India decides to act and overnight
[Guest]: Simi, the student Islamic movement of India has declared a terrorist organization and police
[Guest]: around the country is going around looking for Simi terrorists. And at Parkside police station,
[Guest]: which is near Wahid's house, the police, as usual, with very few Muslims on its ranks,
[Guest]: reaches out to informants and as you know informants in most societies are petty criminals
[Guest]: or some with some criminal background, etc. So, the local mosque, one of the mullahs,
[Guest]: preacher there, he tells, who had a kundak, who had some score to settle with Wahid,
[Guest]: tells the police that Wahid is a Simi member. Police fix him up and that day his life changes.
[Guest]: For the next 10, 12, 15 years, from a school teacher with some conservative views of Islamic
[Guest]: views, religious views that Wahid has, which is his right, he is turned into a Simi terrorist and
[Guest]: by 2013, the court throws out those claims. And later 2014, I think, Wahid is executed also. But
[Guest]: life is ruined and nobody is responsible. No policeman has paid for it. And there are
[Guest]: hundreds of such policemen around the country who have fake encounters, who have killed people,
[Guest]: ruined people's lives because of either ill-information or some rivalry or revenge.
[Guest]: Until we bring in accountability, we will have more and more Wahids being framed. Wahid is
[Guest]: outstanding hero because he at least had the courage to record his story in the courts and he
[Guest]: should trust. What we do not know is the stories of people who do not have the faith and courage
[Guest]: to do this, to document their experiences. So, if you look at him, Wahid is tortured and there
[Guest]: are torture chambers in ATS office in Mumbai, where in the room the AC is put at full blast
[Guest]: and he is stripped naked and there are industrial belts kept there written, Sach bolne wala patta
[Guest]: and there are posters saying that even the deaf and dumb will speak here. I mean, is that police
[Amit Varma]: or is that some underworld don s chamber? I actually want to read out those couple of
[Amit Varma]: paragraphs because I just want all the listeners to listen to it and pick up your book and I think
[Amit Varma]: they are important paragraphs. So, I will read this out and first you set it up. And this is
[Amit Varma]: after he is being arrested at one point in time and he is taken to this ATS office and you write,
[Amit Varma]: quote, Wahid already knew that this repetition was anything but true. From the school, he was
[Amit Varma]: taken to the ATS's Kala Chowki office and straight to a very odd room. He vividly recalls it,
[Amit Varma]: describing the room as looking like the set of a cheap Bollywood film. It had no windows and its
[Amit Varma]: walls were painted white. Much later, he realised that the wall had two layers to make it sound
[Amit Varma]: proof. In the middle was a table and a chair. A bright light was on. On the table were syringes,
[Amit Varma]: batons, coins, iodex gel, electric wires and a water pipe. A large truck tyre hung at one end.
[Amit Varma]: There was a big bell, the kind used in factories which are several inches broad,
[Amit Varma]: with slogans on it. Sach bol patta, meri awas suno, idhar goonga bhi bolta hai. And then there
[Amit Varma]: were handcuffs and old newspapers. Even before he could make sense of the lay of the room,
[Amit Varma]: Wahid was asked to strip naked. The AC was on full blast and the cement floor was freezing.
[Amit Varma]: As a naked Wahid stood shivering, Raghuvanshi walked in wearing civvies. It must have been
[Amit Varma]: around 12.30pm, Wahid estimates. Pointing his finger at Wahid, Raghuvanshi asked,
[Amit Varma]: who is this? Wahid sir, a subordinate replied. Raghuvanshi took a step forward and kicked Wahid
[Amit Varma]: in his groin. Stop quote. And then you go on to say, like basically Raghuvanshi who is this
[Amit Varma]: police officer leading this, leading the ATS at the time, wants him to confess to hosting Pakistani
[Amit Varma]: militants in his house for a couple of days and he says, hey, you know, that didn't happen. And
[Amit Varma]: then you continue your description, quote, after half an hour of the dramatic interrogation,
[Amit Varma]: the ATS chief left, issuing instructions. I want a photo of him jumping, so warm him up.
[Amit Varma]: He slapped Wahid and said, I am not used to no. The gentleman cop, and you put this in quotes
[Amit Varma]: because that's how he'd been described earlier. The gentleman cop walked out. After their boss's
[Amit Varma]: departure, the other policemen told Wahid to accept everything. He refused. And then their
[Amit Varma]: torture shifted to a new gear. The policemen pulled out a bottle of Surya Prakash oil,
[Amit Varma]: an Ayurvedic mix of oils extracted from eucalyptus, clove, mint and camphor,
[Amit Varma]: prescribed for pain relief. But in the interrogation rooms of the ATS, the oil was not
[Amit Varma]: being put to use as per the directions of DM Patel, Pharma Private Limited, but as a tool in
[Amit Varma]: the war on terror. The team thrust a tube into Wahid's rectum and injected the oil into his body.
[Amit Varma]: Within a few minutes, his body was on fire. He started jumping. What the ATS chief wanted,
[Amit Varma]: his subordinates and Surya Prakash oil had delivered in a few minutes, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And what we see happening here, and by the way, Wahid was, you know, acquitted later by the court.
[Amit Varma]: And I wanted to read this bit out because I just feel it's dramatic and everyone needs to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, read the entire book, not just details of this. And Wahid was later acquitted. And what
[Amit Varma]: was happening at this moment in time was that, you know, Surya Vanshi and the Mumbai Police
[Amit Varma]: Commissioner A.N. Roy and the entire security establishment there was intent on fixing the
[Amit Varma]: blame of the bomb blast, which, you know, ripped through those trains on someone and not leave it
[Amit Varma]: as a case unsolved. And because they couldn't find the real perpetrators, they caught this guy.
[Amit Varma]: And later on, when people from the Indian Mujahideen were apprehended in separate case,
[Amit Varma]: they actually confessed to the bomb blast, gave details and so on and so forth. But the case
[Amit Varma]: against these people continued nevertheless. And in fact, while, you know, reading your book,
[Amit Varma]: I did some searches and came across this clip of Raghuvanshi being interrogated by Arnab
[Amit Varma]: Goswami of All People in 2016, where, you know, Arnab is quizzing him on, you know,
[Amit Varma]: why the other agencies, IB or CBI, I forgot, came out with different conclusions and he had
[Amit Varma]: these conclusions. But let that part. My question is on, you know, what people call the streetlight
[Amit Varma]: effect. Have you heard of the streetlight effect? No. So the streetlight effect takes its name from
[Amit Varma]: this old anecdote that there is a drunk guy searching under a streetlight for something.
[Amit Varma]: So a policeman comes to him and says, what are you searching for? And he says, oh, I dropped so
[Amit Varma]: and so thing and so I'm searching for it. So the policeman helps him. And after a while,
[Amit Varma]: the policeman asked him that, did you drop it here? And the drunk guy says, no, no, I dropped
[Amit Varma]: it in the park there. So he says, and why are you searching here? So he said, because the park is
[Amit Varma]: dark, there's light here. So I'm searching here. And that seems to me to be an apt metaphor for
[Amit Varma]: the way security agencies in India do so much of their investigation that they don't really
[Amit Varma]: care about the truth. They'll just do what is convenient. So if something happens,
[Amit Varma]: you have so much power, it is far more convenient for you to pick up a few poor Muslims, get
[Amit Varma]: confessions out of some of them, torture them till some of them turn approvers and build these false
[Amit Varma]: cases. And oh my God, it's an inconvenience if the real culprits run up later, because you just
[Amit Varma]: want the case solved and you want it over with. And so you're searching under the streetlight.
[Amit Varma]: So does this seem like an accurate metaphor? And also in your book, this just happens time and time
[Amit Varma]: again, it's almost institutionalized. So tell me a little bit about this and what leads to this kind
[Amit Varma]: of mindset, like at some level it is that anti-Muslim nature, which we spoke about earlier,
[Amit Varma]: but is that just state or are the incentives really out of whack that finding the real
[Amit Varma]: criminals is not important, lowering the number of unsolved cases matters? What's happening here?
[Guest]: And tell my listeners, how widespread is this? All of it, Amit, but beyond all that,
[Guest]: there is an utter and complete lack of respect for the victims of this bomb blast.
[Guest]: There are hundreds of people, Hindus, Muslims, Christians, all kinds of faith,
[Guest]: and I would presume largely Hindus, who have lost their dear ones.
[Guest]: They want to know who killed their dear ones, who destroyed their families. Our police officers,
[Guest]: these police officers have no respect for them. Forget about the anti-Muslim bias.
[Guest]: Our police officers don't have any respect for those grieving souls.
[Guest]: And that is where we should begin the conversation and we should not be talking about anti-Muslim
[Guest]: bias. Forget the Muslims. Tell me who killed my dear one in that bomb blast.
[Guest]: For all the politics that we talk about, for all the anti-Muslim bias in the organization,
[Guest]: I am saying that don't you have any sympathy or any concern about the quest for closure that
[Guest]: the grieving families have? And this is not just in Mumbai. You find this across the country.
[Guest]: You find this in Gujarat over and over again, in encounter killings. You find this in Naxal areas.
[Guest]: You find this in Manipur. You find this in down south, in Tamil Nadu recently. All over.
[Guest]: It's rampant. Our police forces are also in many ways uniformed gundas.
[Guest]: And a few hundred, a few thousand people are killed in their, you know, in their custody annually.
[Guest]: So, it's not an isolated thing. It's not even, it's not democratic. I mean,
[Guest]: it's not democratic. I mean, how can you, how can we call ourselves a democracy
[Guest]: if in the metropolis of ours, in the most important city of ours, you have interrogation chambers
[Guest]: where they can do anything. And your judiciary has not, and you know, when Indian Mujahideen
[Guest]: people owned up to the bombing, Waheed and the group went to appeal. So, Indian Mujahideen
[Guest]: people in the court, the key witness, he was slightly shaky and did not own up completely
[Guest]: because obviously legal pressure, etc, etc, whatever. When they appealed for the police
[Guest]: officer who interrogated the Indian Mujahideen to be brought, to be called in as a witness,
[Guest]: the appeal went to the Supreme Court and Supreme Court Chief Justice God bless him and other
[Guest]: officers who said that it will set a wrong precedent. He wasn't bothered about the,
[Guest]: probably the 12 innocents being accused as dreaded terrorists. He was bothered about
[Guest]: wrong precedents. So, from the highest judiciary to the lowest courtroom, from the highest office
[Guest]: of police and intelligence to the lower, we have become so insensitive. We are not even bothered
[Guest]: about providing closure to the grieving families of ours. Forget about the Muslim biases, forget
[Guest]: about the way we dehumanise Muslims, Dalits, dehumanise other people, Kashmiris, Manipuris,
[Guest]: Northeast, whatever. So, if you see in the book, I, writing with angst about many such
[Guest]: instances of which I could access records, it's only a minuscule part of what's happening.
[Guest]: On a daily basis, the existence of an average Indian is a cruel existence. He is being
[Guest]: tortured. He is afraid of going to a police station. In which country will a person be
[Guest]: afraid of going into a police station? In which democracy can an ordinary human being be
[Guest]: afraid of going into a police station? In which democracy will the lawyers tell their clients,
[Guest]: don't go to police, avoid going to police at any cost? This is advice that people like me,
[Guest]: I have received this advice. No, no, no, let's not do. If there are occasions when some shit,
[Guest]: some notice, somebody sends, the lawyer is saying, no, no, let's avoid police because
[Guest]: they can say anything. They can frame anything. Look at what's happening in Uttar Pradesh.
[Guest]: I mean, they're killing left, right and centre man, which rule book of this country allows police
[Guest]: to kill. So, it agitates me to think it's not about anti-being anti-Muslim. It's just cruel
[Guest]: animals. And it's not that we don't have good police officers. We have got hundreds and
[Guest]: thousands of good policemen out there. They're all quiet. They just do their job and go home.
[Guest]: It's these thugs who are getting to power because they're satisfying political masters
[Guest]: and because they become heroes, encounter cops. It's unbelievable.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in the context of some of them, I'm reminded of Hannah Arendt's
[Amit Varma]: phrase, the banality of evil. People who look like completely normal,
[Amit Varma]: Sita Sada, people going around doing all of these things. There are some
[Amit Varma]: moving stories from this time as well. Like you talk about Vinod Bhatt, for example,
[Amit Varma]: the officer who is under pressure from the police commissioner A.N. Roy and this K.P.
[Amit Varma]: Raghuvanshi fellow to file charge sheets against these people. And he doesn't want to because
[Amit Varma]: he can see that it's all trumped up. And because he doesn't want to, they implicate his wife in
[Amit Varma]: another case. And eventually he commits suicide in this really bizarre way that while crossing the,
[Amit Varma]: you know, he's on the railway tracks and a train runs over him and he's got his official car
[Amit Varma]: waiting. There's no reason for him at all to be on the platform. It's this bizarre thing.
[Amit Varma]: And you also point out how Manmohan Singh at the time sent a CBI officer he trusted to oversee the
[Amit Varma]: investigation. And that person, you know, while he was there, saw this Pakistani citizen being
[Amit Varma]: interrogated there and clearly he had nothing to do with it. And when he went back to Delhi,
[Amit Varma]: he heard news about how this same Pakistani citizen had now been arrested and implicated
[Amit Varma]: and all of that in this complete cock and bull story. And by the way, the Pakistani citizen,
[Amit Varma]: as it happened, had crossed over from Pakistan in Gujarat, where the gentleman called DG Vansara,
[Amit Varma]: who features in different parts of your book, he's like popping up everywhere, had him sent
[Amit Varma]: to Bombay. Let's talk about Gujarat now, partly because, you know, while you were speaking,
[Amit Varma]: it also sort of struck me as incredibly naive to expect the security establishment, for example,
[Amit Varma]: to care about the truth. The incentives are not about caring for the truth. The incentives are
[Amit Varma]: about building the kind of narratives that suits them and their political masters. And a classic
[Amit Varma]: example of that really is what happened in 2002 in Gujarat, especially how the Godhra narrative
[Amit Varma]: changed, where the Godhra incident happens. And there's enough credible deposition that
[Amit Varma]: it was not a pre-planned thing. It was just one of those things. It happened, great tragedy.
[Amit Varma]: And then you have Modi landing up and then alleging that the ISI has caused it and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: making the decision to take the bodies from Godhra to Ahmedabad and, you know, and everything else
[Amit Varma]: that subsequently happened. But it is not just the riots. It's just the way that the security
[Amit Varma]: establishment is used through the years over there in a way that you call the Gujarat model.
[Guest]: Tell me more about that. I mean, I hope you agree with me that there is no other model in Gujarat.
[Guest]: Definitely no economic model.
[Amit Varma]: That's kind of what the results indicate. I mean, it's very clear even from Modi's record
[Amit Varma]: over the last seven years that in terms of economics, he is as oppressive and autocratic as
[Amit Varma]: people before him, really. I mean, I often say that he got the top-down economic planning model
[Amit Varma]: from Nehru and the autocratic impulses from Indira. So it is ironic that he keeps blaming
[Amit Varma]: those two. I think Indira in particular, or even Sanjay Gandhi is someone who seems a precursor
[Amit Varma]: to what Modi has become. But anyway, that's a digression.
[Guest]: So I think to me, the only model that is out of Gujarat is the security architecture. Because
[Guest]: in many ways, Narendra Modi is a beneficiary of the 9-11 attacks in America. And it's a few
[Guest]: months after that he becomes the chief minister of Gujarat. And after the Godhra tragedy, which
[Guest]: actually is one of the worst tragedies of independent India, he lands up there. And
[Guest]: for purely, I mean, the only reason, only logic I can think is political reasons. He says it's
[Guest]: conspiracy contrary to what the district collector, local police officers and even watchman told the
[Guest]: parliament. And he brings in a handpicked officer, Rakesh Shastana, who is now the Delhi Police
[Guest]: Commission to investigate. His investigation is all centered around conspiracy. And as you know,
[Guest]: the trial court threw out the conspiracy claims while it convicted some people. The fact is that
[Guest]: they all acted again with the same callousness towards the victims. There are 55-60 grieving
[Guest]: families and hundreds of people have lost their dear ones. You owe it to them. See, a police
[Guest]: officer, a law enforcer, a political leader, at some level, you are also my comfort in my moment
[Guest]: of grief. It's like doctors. So, in my moment of grief, I want closure. Any grieving person
[Guest]: wants closure. You never let it happen. You did not provide the closure to those victims of Godhra.
[Guest]: Instead, you created a political spectacle out of it. And we know what happened to it. I mean,
[Guest]: the bodies are released from the Godhra district custody to VHP leaders. Which law in this country
[Guest]: allows dead bodies to be handed over to strangers? Because they were ordered to do that, right?
[Guest]: And it has been recorded by Justice V.R. Krishnayoga's Citizen Tribunal that it was
[Guest]: Narendra Modi who ordered the bodies to be released. And the bodies are brought to Ahmedabad
[Guest]: and it flies up into communal flare-up. And what do we gain? We have thousands of dead families,
[Guest]: thousands of dead people and thousands grieving, both Hindus and Muslims. Let's forget it,
[Guest]: Hindu-Muslim binaries. And Modi becomes this strong man and from there he goes on to build
[Guest]: his so-called Gujarat economic model. But there is no model out there. And over the period that
[Guest]: he is a chief minister, there are a few patterns which you cannot ignore. One being that there
[Guest]: have been a spate of fake encounters. This is not my claim. This is not the claim of any activist.
[Guest]: These are claims and statements made by Gujarat's own police when they were allowed to investigate,
[Guest]: Gujarat's own judicial offices when they were allowed to investigate,
[Guest]: Supreme Court monitored committees. They all said that there have been, all of them have been
[Guest]: fake encounters from Ishrat Jahan encounter to Saurabhudin. In all of these cases,
[Guest]: what is a terrorist coming for? Terrorist is coming to assassinate Narendra Modi.
[Guest]: Now was somebody who had control of police trying to create a hero out of Modi or was it
[Guest]: Modi himself designed this is something that should have been investigated and still needs
[Guest]: to be investigated. But we still don't know. We don't know what would happen. And he comes to Delhi
[Guest]: and after he comes to Delhi, you find a same pattern happening across India. Bhima Kauravgaon
[Guest]: case is not the only case. In fact, I talk about another case where in Ranchi, they try to create
[Guest]: a similar fake narrative of someone trying to assassinate Narendra Modi. Bhima Kauravgaon case
[Guest]: is a criminal conspiracy by an arm of the state to frame some of our finest citizens. There is no
[Guest]: doubt about that. I don't think there is any more dispute about it. Every police officer involved
[Guest]: in it and any political master who was involved in it, they must all be going behind bars. They
[Guest]: should all be facing trial if we call ourselves a democracy. Otherwise, we should rename our
[Guest]: country as a banana republic. Otherwise, we should burn the constitution in the public square there
[Guest]: and say that this constitution has no values. Bhima Kauravgaon is a very classic case of what
[Guest]: I am trying to argue. And Gujarat model is the model of security architecture that Indira Gandhi
[Guest]: perfected and Rajiv Gandhi misused which Narendra Modi has now taken to a different scale to
[Guest]: challenge and ruin and demolish this democracy. Let's not shy away from being honest that if we
[Guest]: don't speak up today, our silence is going to ruin the lives of our children. And that is one of the
[Guest]: reasons why I wrote this book. I really adore my daughter and I hope she and her generation
[Guest]: has a better future and can live in a meritorious society. A meritorious society is only possible
[Guest]: if there is mature democracy. And we don't have it. It's the enemies of our emergence as a mature
[Guest]: democracy, as a liberal democracy are the ones who are ruling this country and who are in the
[Guest]: police force, in uniforms, in intelligence agencies. They need to be reined in. Otherwise,
[Guest]: Amit, you and me, we won't even be able to tomorrow sit and discuss like this.
[Guest]: And mind you, you will see the repercussions of me writing this book over the next few months
[Guest]: when the same deep state will probably try to finger me. And you know what they've been up to
[Guest]: in the last few years? It is all recorded that Adani or Ambani and other corporates who are
[Guest]: Narendra Modi's great pals have all carried out serious breach of laws from over-invoicing of
[Guest]: coal and electrical machinery, where the fine that the state should receive is 15,000 crore rupees
[Guest]: or the Reliance Jio's license is forged. Instead of investigating those national
[Guest]: scandals, the Income Tax and Enforcement Directorate are raiding small-time news startups.
[Guest]: They are serving notices on journalists. They are coming to offices of our little small-time
[Guest]: media outfits and telling them, why do you write against the government?
[Guest]: Amit, my book is not just about Narendra Modi or Indira Gandhi. Amit, you spoke about incentives
[Guest]: all through the conversation. Is there a bigger incentive than your ability to look into the
[Guest]: eyes of your children and say that your father or mother was honest today? That I did not give
[Guest]: into fear? Is there a bigger incentive for a journalist than go home saying that, look,
[Guest]: I did something today. I wiped the tear of the last Indian. There is no bigger incentive here.
[Guest]: I do not think that materialistic incentives can match the incentive of being morally honest.
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, what would be incentives for me and you would not necessarily be incentives
[Amit Varma]: for people out there. And what we have also seen there, like you spoke about people being
[Amit Varma]: silent. And, you know, one possible reason for that is not just the apathy people have because
[Amit Varma]: they feel they cannot do anything, but also the chilling effect of what the state does to people
[Amit Varma]: who do speak up. And just for the benefit of my listeners, I just want to point out that in the
[Amit Varma]: Bhima Koregaon case, as Josie just said, it is now beyond any doubt that they were framed. One
[Amit Varma]: of the first activists to be arrested was Rona Wilson. Forensic analysis has shown conclusively
[Amit Varma]: that all the evidence on his computer was actually planted and, you know, it was hacked and planted
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And it's just this extremely complex and sophisticated operation, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: done by an arm of the security agency. Now, I'm not going to keep you much longer. I'm just going
[Amit Varma]: to end with some final observations and questions because everyone should go out there and read your
[Amit Varma]: book. Obviously, one conversation can't do justice to so many years of work and such a vast narrative,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and there are so many arcs in there. There is the arc about how security agencies
[Amit Varma]: have created their own militant outfits all over the place. They did it in Kashmir,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Salwa, Jodhum and Chhattisgarh and the kind of havoc that they create,
[Amit Varma]: sometimes even worse than the terrorists. You've also written about the fascinating story of
[Amit Varma]: Afzal Guru and the connection with the Vindarsingh that apparently he was asked by the Vindarsingh
[Amit Varma]: to come to Delhi and to put up these people and, you know, before that he was just an informer and
[Amit Varma]: you've spoken about how so many informers are later framed themselves and the Vindarsingh,
[Amit Varma]: of course, was in the news. Firstly, last year or the year before that when, you know, he was
[Amit Varma]: arrested in Kashmir by his own police carrying two terrorists in his car. And just recently,
[Amit Varma]: if I remember correctly, there was some news item where, you know, the state put out this
[Amit Varma]: notice saying that they're not going to pursue the case in national security interests or some
[Amit Varma]: shit like that, whatever that means. So, is that something you can speak about, by the way?
[Guest]: What is the Vindarsingh deal? The Vindarsingh has been this notorious,
[Guest]: like many notorious Kashmir police officers who have been known for being mixed up with,
[Guest]: see, in the fog of war, you know, a police officer will have to deal with informants,
[Guest]: militants, etc. And I'm not stating any state secret when I'm saying that Afzal Guru
[Guest]: was a militant who returned home and wanted to try to lead a normal life but was forced to be
[Guest]: an informant with BSF and with the police. And he was quite notorious in Sopore where,
[Guest]: which is a very pro-militant area, he knew that he'll be bummed off by the militants because
[Guest]: he was betraying far too many militants. So, he decided to leave and come to Delhi and that is
[Guest]: when he says the Vindarsingh called him up and asked him to come down to Kashmir and one last
[Guest]: job for him. This claim that Afzal Guru has made in the court, the Vindarsingh has not refuted.
[Guest]: His allegation was against a uniformed police officer of this country. So, I would go by Afzal
[Guest]: Guru until the Vindarsingh comes to court and refutes it, right? So, he's asked to, from
[Guest]: Kashmir, bring these people and drop them to Delhi who are the people who end up attacking
[Guest]: the parliament. And Afzal Guru at the trial court, in fact, if you know, he did not take
[Guest]: any legal help. He said, I don't want any lawyers to help because he told someone who was in jail
[Guest]: with him that he has been promised by the police that after the trial and conviction etc, he'll be
[Guest]: freed, he'll be a free man. So, the deep state that was at work at the parliament attack is
[Guest]: something that needs to be investigated. It is not a very simple terrorist attack.
[Guest]: There was arms of the state which were involved in it. And again, mind you, I am not talking some
[Guest]: wild conspiracy theory here, Amit. I am talking about for the fate of our children, for the future
[Guest]: of our children, for the future of this democracy, truth is our greatest defense for any democracy.
[Guest]: And I can tell you there are some masters out there in the governance structures even today
[Guest]: who will say, oh, you know, the collective interest of the country should override that
[Guest]: of the individual. No. An individual empowered with his liberty is the greatest assurance of a
[Guest]: state. Not the otherwise. There is nobody out there who has the wisdom to decide what is good
[Guest]: for the state other than that illiterate voter out in that dirty village. Devendra Singh continues
[Guest]: to do whatever he was doing. Finally, he was arrested when he was again trying to bring some
[Guest]: terrorists to Delhi. Again, claims of J&K police, not ours. But this case is taken over by NIA for
[Guest]: whatever reason. And if NIA was to be investigating terror angle or whatever, I do not think anything
[Guest]: coming. What we know is that the state government has decided to discharge him from government,
[Guest]: right, to compulsorily retire him and not to pursue the case. Expected because we have heard
[Guest]: other stories of Devendra Singh s linkages to higher ups. Devendra Singh is not an outlier as
[Guest]: you say. He is not a lone wolf. He is that visible tip of an iceberg where there are far
[Guest]: bigger fishes out there in that iceberg. Yeah, visible tip of an iceberg is a good
[Amit Varma]: way to put it. Though I do not know how fishes get inside icebergs, but I get it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, another fascinating strand of your book which I would like listeners to read for
[Amit Varma]: themselves is all about the strand of how the security establishment went easy on Hindu terror
[Amit Varma]: and on groups like Abhinav Bharat to the extent that, you know, as you mentioned in the book,
[Amit Varma]: you have been told by people that they might have been a creation of the security establishment
[Amit Varma]: itself. All very scary stuff. So there is this, you know, excellent quote right at the end of
[Amit Varma]: your book which I want to read out with the last five words being key. Quote, there is a strange
[Amit Varma]: pattern in some of these cases. The investigation agency prepares a massive charge sheet running to
[Amit Varma]: thousands of pages attaching all kinds of evidence that no one will have the time or patience to go
[Amit Varma]: through in detail. When these cases go to trial, the accused may well be exonerated. But in the
[Amit Varma]: slow churn of the Indian judiciary, the process is a punishment. Stop quote. And these words,
[Amit Varma]: of course, the process is the punishment, the old cliche. And this is what we see in Bhima Korega.
[Amit Varma]: This is what we see repeatedly time and again. So first of all, I got to laud you for your
[Amit Varma]: idealism and your courage in writing the book. I mean, you know, at the start where you lambasted
[Amit Varma]: Rakesh Asana and then pointed out that he's a current police commissioner of Delhi where you
[Amit Varma]: live. I was like, my God, you know, how is this guy doing this? So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: your future projects if you wish to talk about them. And also about the other things you do.
[Amit Varma]: Like earlier, you mentioned you were a multitasker. There are startups. Before we started our
[Amit Varma]: conversation, you told me you were in my part of town in Mumbai recently because you were meeting
[Amit Varma]: all kinds of interesting film people for different projects and all of that. So is there something
[Amit Varma]: you'd like to share with what is coming up for you? And what would you like to tell not just
[Amit Varma]: investigative journalists, but also people in civil society who feel animated by these problems?
[Amit Varma]: But they must be thinking that why should I speak out? Why should I risk myself? You know,
[Amit Varma]: do the practical thing just now. You know, it's a chilling effect at work. Just chill. You know,
[Amit Varma]: it's a very nice book. I'll recommend it to friends in person. But, you know, why get further
[Amit Varma]: into this? Let shit play out. Especially if you're elite Hindus and you're thinking that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I am not at danger at any moment in time. Let me get on with life. Yes, you know, at an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: level, this is shocking. But why should I do anything? What would you have to tell them,
[Guest]: for example? Answering the first part. So I have this media startup where trying to see if I can
[Guest]: create a scalable model of investigative journalism, which where I can sustain and
[Guest]: support rigorous investigative journalism, which can be scaled up. Because the existing models
[Guest]: which are dependent upon subscriptions, advertisement or reader donations are not
[Guest]: very scalable. So I am trying to convert. I am trying to see if I can convert some of my
[Guest]: investigative stories or our stories into documentaries, books, scripted series,
[Guest]: films, etc. We have announced a feature film last week called Fandom Hospital,
[Guest]: which is where the Malayalam director Mahesh Narayan is making his Bollywood entry,
[Guest]: and which I am co-producing with Tuss Tales, which is founded by Preeti Sahani.
[Guest]: She is a producer of Talwar, Raazi, etc. I do have some projects with Vikram Motwane
[Guest]: and Andhra Krishap, etc. The idea is to see whether I can, we can find partners who would
[Guest]: want to adopt edgy, real-life investigative stories. But one thing which I made good
[Guest]: happening is that at the peak of the content revolution that is sweeping the world, there
[Guest]: is a huge demand for real-life, edgy stories. From Anarchos to When They See Us to Chernobyl
[Guest]: is all real-life stories. So that is where I am trying to place my journalism and see if I can
[Guest]: sell. But given the chilling censorship that is sweeping India, I am finding a lot of resistance.
[Guest]: But that is okay. That is part of life. To the second part of the question,
[Guest]: which is about you, what you said about the elite, upper caste, Hindus especially.
[Guest]: See if you let the monster grow. It does not have any religion. Monster has no religion,
[Guest]: no differentiators. They will come for you. They will come for you in the form of income
[Guest]: tax notices. They will come for you in the form of police bribes. They will come for you in the
[Guest]: form of dirty roads. They will come for you in the form of flooded cities. They will come for
[Guest]: you in the form of pollution. They will come, they will get you. If you quietly sit back
[Guest]: and think that this will all wash away, because the police is anti-Muslim. No.
[Guest]: Because the state is anti-Muslim.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: They are getting you.
[Guest]: Do you know at least a part of the pollution that we are breathing, air pollution in this
[Guest]: country is contributed by the poor quality of coal that a group of corrupt corporates
[Guest]: have imported into India?
[Guest]: Do you know that you are paying extra charge for electricity because they have overbilled
[Guest]: for their power generation equipments?
[Guest]: So at every turn of your life, you are already a victim of this nepotistic state, this corrupt
[Guest]: state and the security establishment.
[Guest]: So you have no option.
[Guest]: Either you speak up, stand up together.
[Guest]: We don't know.
[Guest]: We will debate.
[Guest]: We can disagree.
[Guest]: You can say that I am too sympathetic towards Muslims.
[Guest]: I am too...
[Guest]: You can say anything to me.
[Guest]: But let's debate rationally, intelligently.
[Guest]: Let us not be afraid.
[Guest]: Let us not be so afraid that we will start playing video game visuals as TV news.
[Guest]: Let us not be so afraid that we will start carrying and discussing fake WhatsApp forwards
[Guest]: as truth.
[Guest]: Let us not be so afraid that we snatch away the dreams of our children.
[Guest]: We intimidate our children to sleep, not letting them dream.
[Guest]: And those have no religions.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, very wise words.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I've always said that India's core problem is a predatory state that our founders
[Amit Varma]: designed and that predatory state has already predated upon us and is doing so as we kind
[Amit Varma]: of are not even aware, you know, the seen and the unseen right there.
[Amit Varma]: Josie, I'm just filled with even more admiration for you after chatting with you and reading
[Amit Varma]: The Silent Coup, which is such a wonderful book.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you so much for your time and your insights and take care, boss.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: All the very best to you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and pick up Josie Joseph's excellent book, The Silent Coup, A History of India's
[Amit Varma]: Deep State.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Josie on Twitter and JosieJosephKJ, that's one word.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.